Good morning, minister.
Um, mean thank you very much for being here.
And look, uh, take the opportunity to, um, spoken
to the Social Services and Community committee,
and, uh, opportunity to introduce yourself
and any of your team, um, and space, some moment, comments.
Then we'll move to
Thank you.
Um, uh, just grateful for another opportunity, uh, to sit
and talk about the work that Ang has been doing.
Um, the heart of the work is about ensuring
that every child in New Zealand is safe,
supported, and able to thrive.
Um, we've made progress this year
and overcome entrenched challenges,
and we remain committed to improving outcomes
for children and young people.
Over the past year, orang TAM has de delivered on its core
purpose as well as implementing significant changes.
Uh, orang Tam better managed the 1.527 billion in revenue
without cutting frontline services.
Thanks to the implementation
of improved best practice processes,
we've seen real progress in the youth offending
and the government set target of 15% reduction by 2030.
As of Septembers, the numbers have fallen by 17%.
Uh, the budget 2025 invest across three priority areas,
improving safety and care, encouraging new caregivers,
and improving their support services,
addressing serious youth offending.
Uh, and we've made progress, uh, in those areas.
We're also acting on the Royal Commission's findings,
which were a stark reminder of past failures
and that something needs to be done.
We've responded with legislative changes
to strengthen safety and eliminate harmful practices,
and we're investing 35.7 million
to make the care system safer
and improve the redress process.
We know there are still challenges in our communities
and across the children's system.
Reports of concern have risen sharply.
They're up 44% in the past year.
Uh, to give context to that, that's from around 75,000
to 95,000, uh, which is quite a big jump.
Some of that is because of the change of practice, uh,
in the way we do reports of concern.
Um, but there's still an increase.
Uh, we must continue to reduce the unallocated cases
and ensure timely responses for young people.
Our focus is now embedding long-term sustainable change
through quality practice, investing in our people
and systems, and empowering our partners to lead responses.
Uh, so that's our Enabling Communities programs.
The frontline technology system will replace an outdated
system and give social workers the tools they need
to spend more time, uh, in front of children.
And with whanau, we are implementing DAM care
and potassium's recommendations
to strengthen safety nets across the children's system.
And we remain committed, uh, to our obligations.
Uh, when it comes to treating,
working in genuine partnerships to deliver better outcomes
is focused on our, on the core responsibility.
Now, the care and protection of children.
I want to acknowledge the dedication of partners,
communities, and the staff.
It has been a very busy year.
This is complex work,
and together they are building a system
that truly puts the children first.
Uh, and I'll leave it open to the committee
'cause I'm only here for a short time.
Thank you much. Uh, first question, will Ija?
Thank you, minister. On a scale of one
to 10, how successful
Do you think the military Style Academy,
Uh, was?
Uh, I wouldn't be able to give you a one to 10,
but what I would say is, uh, is something
that has made a huge improvement into young people's lives.
Uh, I asked some questions yesterday in regards to,
uh, where we're at now.
Uh, we've got six out in the community now.
Uh, those who did re-offend have not re-offended since being
back out from the community.
Uh, and quite frankly, uh, that's a success.
We have six young people who are now out in the community
not offending, uh,
and actually have made their lives better.
And I'm really proud of them
and I'm proud of the families that wrapped around them.
But the biggest, uh, thing is the prevention side as well.
There were 29 siblings of these young people,
and we've got in front of those 29 siblings, their hanau,
their parents, uh,
and supported them in what they need so
that they don't go down that same pathway, uh,
because there is that risk.
Uh, so I, I highly rate the, uh, first charge
of the military style Academy.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and now we are assessing
what number we are assessing.
We are assessing, uh, how, how we could do better.
Uh, and we are looking at what we can do moving forward.
Supplementary, when is the next
military style Academy scheduled
For? Uh, there have
been no decisions made in that space. Uh,
Minister, why are you not front
with the public when the next military Soil
Academy is planned for March?
Uh, no. There've been no definite decisions made
in that space that I'm aware of. Is there planning
Happening for one in March?
There's planning happening on training staff to prepare
and get ready, but no plans
have been made on definite dates.
Next question.
Uh, thank you. Given
that 227 young people were held in police custody
for more than 24 hours in the 24 25 year,
which is 62% above the ministry's own target of 140,
what does the ministry identify as the key drivers
of this continued failure to meet the target?
And what concrete actions are being taken
to reduce these numbers?
Yeah, so, uh, the prison cells, uh,
no one wants a young person to sit in a prison cell,
but when we are making decisions about
where young people go once they're arrested, uh, we have
to make sure that they're safe.
Uh, and the way we co cohort in our residences
needs to be done properly.
So sometimes we have to move young people
around the country, um,
move the young people from a residence to another residence
because cohorting them in the same place may not be safe.
Um, so I I, whilst I don't like the idea
of a young business sitting in a cell, making sure
that they're safe until we can,
until we can get them into a, a safe, uh, space to stay, uh,
is the best way to do this.
Thank you, minister. So you believe the number, um,
that remains far above the target is
because of moving children to safe places, even,
even after multiple years
of acknowledging this is a persistent issue,
so there's no safe spaces for them to go,
which is why there's been such a big increase in the number
of kids in cells?
Yeah, there's many reasons.
Uh, and another reason is around the infrastructure.
So we've been working really hard on infrastructure.
Uh, when I first came in, a lot
of the residences were very run down, uh, not actually fit
for purpose for young people to be staying.
Um, so we haven't been at full big capacity
as we've been renovating
and fixing up the youth justice residences so
that they are in, uh, they are a better place
for the young people to live in, um,
and are fit for purpose.
Um, so whilst we've been doing that, there has been,
uh, a shortage of beds.
Uh, but we're expecting to be at better bed capacity
and bigger big capacity.
But I think it's February next year know that
We are increasing it.
We are gonna be able to have more capacity by February
Next year. Yeah, February next
year.
Thank you. And so, um, you've done some analysis on this
systemic factors around bed shortages.
Have you done any, um, further work to understand those
systemic factors, including interagency coordination issues
or bail and remand decisions which are contributing
to young people being held in police sales
for extended periods?
Um, yes, there has been.
Um, but I can't really speak to the operational side of
that, but someone may be able to get,
Well, I think, um, what, sorry, minister.
Um, so there's quite a bit of work going on in terms
of reducing youth offending
and, um, we can talk to that later.
Um, in terms of the actual in cells,
as the minister's indicated, there's issues around, um, uh,
what residences we can put our children into.
There's also remand residence as well,
and there's a broader issue around, um, uh, placements.
Um, and that's, uh, something we're also looking at.
So that's trying to reduce the number
of children in motels, et cetera.
But it's just the emergency situation
that we had once an arrest has been made, uh,
and it is ongoing work to try
and find out where we can put those children
immediately. So
That isn't a, that isn't a cell made for adults.
Sorry, that isn't a cell made for adults?
Uh, well, that's, no, no, that's not desirable,
but it's probably more desirable since some
of the alternatives in terms of keeping the child safe. So,
So I was concerned about that as well.
So I actually went to a visit
where these young people are processed
and put into the cells just to make sure, uh, for myself
that they're not, um, near the adults,
that they're not in an environment where they are seeing or
or being aware of something happening right next to them,
uh, from adults.
Uh, they are kept in a different wing away from the adults.
They have a open, uh, room that they're in during the day.
They have visitors.
Uh, their social worker is in there, uh,
every day working with them.
Um, so it's not like they're sitting in a locked cell, um,
uh, for, for that hold time.
They have have an open space, uh,
which they stay in during the day.
Thank you. So what specific interventions
or collaborations with police or,
or youth justice services are being implemented
to prevent young people being detained in police custody
for longer than 24 hours?
So one of the things we've done this year is, um,
trialed three intensive case management teams.
So these are teams with lower social work case loads
and who are working collaboratively with police
and other agencies in including, um, community agencies.
And we targeted the targeted that for the three regions
that had the highest rates of reoffending
or or amongst the highest rates.
So, um, uh, Christchurch
and, uh, plenty.
Um, and it's, it's early days in that work,
but it is absolutely targeted at, uh, young people
who are most likely to re-offend, have remand issues, um,
end up in police custody.
So that's where we, that's one of the, the examples
of tackling that hard end.
And of course, the work in Fast Track is all about stopping
the, the PI in,
and that's all about inter case,
interagency case management.
So because this target is consistently missed,
do you think it's unrealistic?
No. I mean, you've always gotta set a target
because, uh, you want to be doing better.
Um, the, the issue has really been around, uh,
having enough beds, uh, which is around the infrastructure,
uh, which we are working as fast as possible, uh, to fix.
Uh, there's also opportunities where we can look at, uh,
young people who, who, uh, can be in community homes, uh,
rather than within residences, uh,
and making sure that we are placing them in the most
appropriate, uh, appropriate, uh, scenarios.
Uh, so we are working through that
and making sure that we are cohorting better.
Uh, and that's not just, uh, for those,
for the young people's sake, that's, that's safety, um,
that's making sure that we've got the
right people in the right places.
So just one last question.
What assurances can, um, the minister provide
that the number will decrease meaningfully
In the coming year?
And what indicators will you use to determine this
Progress? Uh, look, we'll
keep that target
and we'll keep working on the things that we know, uh,
which is, uh, the multi-agency response, uh, trying
to get less people ending up
before the courts, uh,
than are currently ending up before the courts.
Uh, and we are seeing that
with the reduction in the serious youth offending, uh,
less young people re-offending means less young people
actually ending up being, uh, put in the cells
because they're not being arrested.
Uh, and actually looking at our bed numbers, uh,
and also looking at, uh,
high-end conflict needs young people, uh, because the high
and complex needs has really risen, uh,
over the last few years.
Uh, so investing in that space.
Uh, so we also have a, a residence, uh, in Christchurch
that will be reopening, uh, for high
and complex needs, uh, to make sure
that they have the support that they need so
that they don't end up, uh, down the road of offending.
So there's lots of work happening. Supplementary relief
Minister, you just mentioned there, um,
increasing the capacity in, um,
these Youth Justice facilities,
you might remember when we had an annual review a little
while ago, uh, over $70 million was given back
for building smaller, uh, in community facilities.
Um, is it the case that you are looking at increasing the
beds in the current Youth justice facilities?
Uh, no, not currently.
What we are currently doing is making sure
that the Youth Justice facilities are fit for purpose, uh,
and meets the standards that they need to meet for people
to be actually living within those residences.
Uh, some of them, uh, were pretty poor, uh,
when I first came in.
So a lot of money is invested in that,
that $70 million you are speaking
of us returning was put aside, uh, was actually, uh,
procured before I became minister.
Uh, it was procured by the previous minister. Yeah.
We gave it plan that because it was meant
to have been spent on community residences
and not one residence was built.
So can I just clarify, We didn't have a plan.
Use that money. It had to be used for those residences.
And is your plan now Was infrastructure
and nothing was investment ready?
Um, so we gave the money back
because there's no point in money sitting in a bank account
and doing nothing like it was with the previous government.
So just Wait, wait. Just remind questions through the
Chair. Sure. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, so can you please tell us today, are you planning
to increase the beds in the current Youth
Justice facilities?
Uh, no, not currently.
Currently it is just infrastructure
to fix the current residences.
And one final supplementary on that one,
why did the prison Inspectorate uh,
visit the Youth Justice facilities?
Uh, because as we were talking about collaboration, uh,
between agencies making sure
that we have the right safety mechanisms in place within our
Youth Justice residences, and we can learn from each other.
So I asked if they could go in and help
and support us to make sure
that we have all the correct safety measures in place, uh,
that we can for our young people and for the staff.
But we knew increase. New question, Paula? No.
Um, minister, uh, there has been a trending down of, uh,
reports of harm in family placements,
and there's been a trending up of, uh, reports
of harm in non-family placements.
I wanted to just quickly ask, do you attribute this to,
do you attribute this to, um, the change in systems
where reporting is made easier?
That's one question.
And the second question is,
could you let us know about the nature of the report of harm
that you, uh, received? Thank you.
Uh, yes. So, so when we look at, um, uh,
are you talking about actual harm or reports of harm?
Reports of harm? Um, so I'll,
I'll get just actual reports of harm.
And you're talking about children in care as opposed
to general reports of concern?
Yes. So, um, there's a real complexity to the picture
of our recording, so we may want to talk more about
that in, in our session.
But what I would just, the, the, the high level piece is
that, um, we are seeing a reduction in harm by the people
who are, um, given the responsibility of care.
So approved caregivers, um, staff members, uh, parents, um,
and, and those reductions are balanced by an increase
of harm for young people in community, by other people
who aren't responsible for their care.
So, um, when we are seeing harm and residences
and in, in group home settings,
it's usually when there's challenging behavior
and we need to equip our people better to be able
to respond in those situations so we don't shift
to an inappropriate use of force, for example.
So that's essentially a, a short answer.
There's a lot more in the safety of children and care space,
but I wouldn't want to take your time. Yeah, thank
You.
So, um, I mean, and,
and then, then we, yeah, like she was saying,
when we look at the harm and how it's reported, uh, we have
to be very careful that we don't just throw out a child
as harmed in care, uh,
because that's, that's very generalized.
Um, and so we need to be making sure that around,
I think it's around 66% of young people, uh, in care,
in return to family, aren't actually harmed
by their caregivers
or the person who is responsible for caring for them.
They're actually harmed out in the community
in their everyday lives.
Uh, and so our job then is to actually, uh, a,
support the caregiver, uh,
because no caregiver wants to know that,
that their child has been harmed, um, by somebody else.
Uh, so supporting the young person
and the caregiver, uh, through that process.
Supplementary Ricardo. Thank you. Um, so
With that Surge, um,
and reports of concern, I think it was 44%, um,
surgeon reports of concern, um,
between the 23, 24 and 24 25 periods.
Um, and it acknowledged that the short shortages
of qualified social workers timely response rate
for critical and very urgent reports of has fallen from 92
to 86%, meaning that more children at risk
of serious harm are not being seen within that required 24
to 48 hour timeframe.
So how can the minister justify this deterioration in, um,
safety performance?
Um, so we're doing a, a lot of work in the, uh,
national call center, uh, to look at how, uh,
we are triaging those reports of concern, uh, making sure
that, um, they are going to the right sites
and the right places who have the, uh, capacity
to be able to deal with that.
Um, I, I can't speak to the, uh, 24 hour one,
but luckily it may be able to.
Um, but there is a lot of work going on.
Uh, it's also about, uh, making sure that, uh,
when the reports concern come in,
that we're getting all the information that we need.
Uh, so we're working on how we can template, uh,
a report concern so that we get a real fast turnaround,
we have all the information we need, um, it's simplified,
uh, and we're also looking at, uh, technology
and how that can help us in that triaging process so
that the really urgent cases don't get lost, uh,
amongst, uh, the others.
Thank you, minister. And does the minister accept
that the rapid rise in reports of concern is connected
to last year's cuts, 45 million from back office support
and 160 million from community organizations,
which previously helped prevent escalation into crisis?
Uh, no, there's no evidence of that.
But what I can say is, uh, there's also evidence that
during COVID, uh,
young people weren't in front of, uh, people.
They were at home, they were isolated, uh,
and we couldn't cite them.
So now that young people are back at school,
attendance is a lot higher.
Uh, we are getting more reports
of concern from other agencies, uh, than community, uh,
because we now have site on those young people.
Uh, and, uh, what I would say is the collaboration, uh,
between agencies, uh, is, is getting better.
Uh, it has really improved to the point where, uh, now, uh,
education knows that they're going to get, uh, a good, uh,
kind of turnaround on their reporter concern.
They're going to get a, a return phone call to say, yep,
we've received your report concern.
Uh, and somebody's looking into that
before it was like an empty chasm where they'd make a call
and they didn't necessarily know if anything was happening,
so they assumed nothing was happening.
Uh, so it's around communication, uh,
and building up the trust between agencies to know
that something's going to be done
when they pick up the phone. Thank you, Mr. Supplementary.
This is just, just on this, um,
one in particular. Just need
A bid for a Supplementary through the chair.
Okay, sure. Can I please have a supplementary?
Sure. Oh, thank you.
Uh, so just to confirm, even though there was a 44% increase
in those, um, serious critical reports of concern, you
are not worried at all
that 160 million cut from community organizations
that work on prevention was impacted in any way?
It's to do with COVID
and it's to do with kids getting to school.
It's, it is to do with us having better oversight
of the young people and better collaboration between
agencies, uh, the multi-agency tables, uh,
where we have young people in front of, uh, all agencies,
uh, helping to make a plan.
Uh, we also get reports of concern outta that from siblings,
um, from, uh, from friends in the community.
Uh, so there's a lot of work going on to make sure
that we are collaborate, collaborating, uh, across agency.
Like I said, a lot of the reports
of concern come from other government agencies. Uh,
Did that not happen before?
Uh, uh, no, not to the extent that it's happening now.
Alright. Well, thank you. Need any questions?
I need to be chair. I have other people
who are asking bloody the questions. Ask to Helen.
I very much was gonna ask a primary in this area,
so I'm gonna continue as a sub.
Um, so we have a hundred thousand reports
where we had 63,000 reports of concern.
And one of my concerns was that there have been a commitment
for critical or urgent reports to be dealt with.
And 95% of those, um, uh,
whether you are only getting 80, I think the,
the target was 95% would be turned around quick.
You're getting 86% turned around.
What I'm concerned about is those definitions.
I have had one constituent who came to see me
because they had, their daughter had made a report
and it was over a girl who had been hung out
of a window by her mom.
And it wasn't, it didn't seem to be treated as urgent.
In fact, it seemed to be battered right back.
So what I wanna know is what's critical? What's urgent?
Is that an acceptable number?
'cause I'm worried about that number,
but also, what are we going to see in terms of transparency
on all the reports that aren't being categorized
as urgent or critical?
Because that might have been one of them.
So I wanna know what, because I wanna know from the agency
and from the minister, are we digging down
and making sure that they're just not being swept into a
category that are no longer urgent or critical?
It's a big question. It's a few wrapped in.
I'm sorry about it, but it's, that's my experience
as a constituent mp.
Ready? Yes. Okay.
Um, so what I would say to that is, first off, um, uh,
that case you are speaking to, um, I'm unaware of that.
Uh, and if you do have a case like that, uh,
that you're really, really concerned about
more than one case that you think is critical.
Yeah. Well, they, you can be sending them through
to my office so that I'm aware of that
as well, so that I can follow up.
Uh, that would be helpful if you think that it's
that serious and that you're really that concerned about it.
Uh, please let my, let me
and myself know about that so
that I can follow those ones up.
Uh, but what I would say is, yes, we do know, um,
that there has been a massive increase
and we're working as fast as we can, uh, to get the system
to catch up to that increase.
Um, but we, nobody goes to work
and says we are going to ignore
a phone call when a kid is in danger.
Uh, I have not seen any evidence of,
of people categorizing things lower just to,
just to not deal with it.
So, so in our recording,
so if that's what you're asking Yeah.
So I'm saying in the reporting, sorry,
jumped a few things into one.
Yeah. But you've got a,
a category called critical and urgent.
Yep. We are not seeing in this report any
statistics about what's not considered critical and urgent
and no definition of what critical
and urgent looks like so that we can hold the agency
to account over time.
Yeah. So I wanna know, have you asked those questions?
Do you have those numbers?
Do you know what critical and urgent looks like?
And are you expecting that definition to stay the same?
Also, what are you doing about the fact you are still,
the agency is still saying that, oh, I just
Have to bring, I've got a
lot of movers waiting for questions.
Yeah, there's an awful lot in that.
Um, but what I would say is, you make a very good point.
Um, there is the critical need young people
where they're at very high risk of fer harm, uh, that must
that we are aiming to be within 24 hours, uh, citing
that young person and, and,
and putting things in place to make them safe.
Uh, not every phone call that comes through
that office is critical,
which is why we've also, uh, done some work.
We've actually working with community, uh,
we are running a pilot now.
We are reports of concern that don't meet the standard of,
of further action needed by Ang Tamari, uh, actually go
to community and community follows up, uh, on those reports
of concern and put services in place of those young people
that don't meet that category
because somebody picked up the phone
for a reason, there was a concern.
It might not be high need now,
but if it's ignored, it will become high need.
Uh, so there's a lot of work going on for those young people
that are below that standard
before, um, I'm not sure what happened,
but I do know that, uh, the case was closed,
no further action needed, uh,
and there wasn't as much community work going on
to make sure that those reports are concerned were followed
up those lower end ones. I'm gonna move to your question.
Thank you. Um, minister, um,
minister you opened your conversation with words like, um,
safe and supported, able to thrive.
Then you took us to a,
a genuine partnerships treaty was some
of your original discussion,
which was, which was good to hear.
I, I, um, then you followed up with,
it truly puts the the child first or children first.
I, I guess what I'm trying to reconcile then is, uh,
probably the last couple of years of, um, what we've,
what what I know and the communities that I work in
and live in is the relationship that the,
the trust or the lack of trust minister
and, um, c Maori communities particularly.
Um, and you might have a few in certain areas across them
or two, and you can, you can cite those as well.
We've got four. Um,
but there is such a, a, a decline in that trust
of Maori relationships
and trust with minister with you actually, and your,
and, and the team.
And I, I'm, I guess what I want
to know is when you say truly puts the children first,
and you've been coach as saying culture doesn't matter,
and I know we've been here before, I'm not, but I guess,
but at the base of it, when Maori people hear that,
they see that as a, as you saying, it doesn't matter,
culture doesn't matter as if culture isn't a safety factor.
And I, I'm really trying to understand what's behind
that kind of, um, that thinking and experience even.
Yeah. Can you, can you help me understand that context?
Um, I, first of all, I disagree with your statement that,
um, that I don't have, uh, good relationships with Maori.
I've been up and down the country, uh, for the last year.
Uh, and I've been out, uh, or every weekend, uh,
and every week, uh, visiting not only, uh, orang, tamari,
uh, but Iwi and Hapu across the country, uh,
we've built up good relationships.
Uh, we are actually in the process now of, of working
through quite a few, few new agreements, uh, with Iwi
and Hapu around the country, uh, working side by side
with Ang Tamari, uh, in the enabling community space.
Um, so, uh, I'd just like to say I absolutely disagree with,
uh, your statement, blanket statement
that Maori don't trust me, um,
and that I don't have a relationship with them, uh,
because I have spent the last year building up those
relationships and making sure that we are working together
for the betterment of those. So,
Of course, relationship minister. Yeah. On
A scale of one to 10 question, new question, Jamie.
Uh, thank you, minister for the work
that you do in this area.
My, my questions around budget 2025, uh,
there was a $68.5 million funding boost over five
financial years to invest in the technology part,
my technology system.
Mm-hmm. What I want know from you, minister,
is what's your oversight of that and, uh, the timeline of,
and like, what oversight you and what's your expectation?
Um, so, uh, I get, um, weekly updates, um,
each week, uh, of understanding where we're at, uh, with
that frontline technology upgrade.
Uh, the procurement process must be, uh, what I don't want
to see, uh, is a massive spike in the post.
Uh, and we're, and we are not meeting our timeliness.
Um, so I've just had a recent update and,
and we are on track for that timeliness.
Uh, the procurement process took a little bit longer, uh,
than we probably would've liked,
but we want to get that right.
Uh, but the first tran is the most important to myself,
to be perfectly honest.
Uh, and it's around the all about need plan for children,
uh, and young people to make sure
that they have access to their lives.
Social workers, uh, have a better understanding of
that young person, their plan and, and being able to see,
or the click of a button if we are meeting
that young person's needs.
Uh, and that is, uh, due, the training is due
to be rolled out, uh, early next year.
Um, and by the end of the year, hopefully
that first tranche, uh,
the most important tranche, uh, will be available.
Uh, but, uh, I do get weekly updates to make sure
that we're on track and making sure
that we are not getting lost, uh, in the process
as you can often do with a, a technology upgrade.
Uh, but Nicolette may want to speak to that
'cause it's Nicolette's baby.
Um, we're due to have an implementation plan
for ministerial approval in around May next year.
So that will be following a really robust
and, um, procurement process.
But, um, that procurement process is progressing well.
Um, and, you know, subject to that process,
which is obviously confidential, um, I have
pretty good confidence that we'll come out
with a, a good solution.
But as the minister says, we're not waiting for that.
We're doing some things in our current system.
Um, two things. The digitization of be all about,
all about money plan and, um,
and the digitization about other report of concern,
and is a tool to help our people navigate complex policy
and guidance more easily using, um, adaptive technology.
So we, we are leaning into
as much we can do in the current system as well as, uh,
risk responsible
and careful approach to choosing the right system.
Choosing a system that is worse than
what we've got would be the worst outcome,
and we're not prepared to take that risk.
Thank you. Thank you. Um, minister,
that's the time we have available this morning.
Thank you for coming and speaking to the committee.
Thank you too. Appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you.
We'll continue with the, uh, with the agency.
Well, good morning, uh, Mr. Bridgeman.
Um, what we might do is just, uh, give you an opportunity
to introduce yourself and,
and, uh, members, uh, some members of your team
and to make comments yourself.
And then we'll move to questions from members.
Uh, look, thank you very much, um, uh, chair
and, um, thanks to the select committee.
Um, next, uh, sitting next to me is, um,
our chief social worker as Minister cte, uh, Dickinson.
And then behind me is, um, our, uh, leadership team.
Um, look, we are really pleased to be here today.
Um, we feel we've been kind of working really hard,
um, over the last year.
There's been a lot of work, um, in a number of areas,
which has just been described getting that budget bit.
And now I implementing the, um, development program, a lot
of work around commissioning, um,
and trying to improve the relationship with providers
and make sure that commission is more effective.
Um, there's been work around training social workers
and introducing a new kind of social work training program
work around devolution, um, which is really,
really important because ultimately, you know,
the community will, um, do a really good job,
rightly supported and looking after these children, um,
and, uh, work around, um, helping, um, caregivers.
So kind of a big mish board of work,
and I want to thank my team for that.
Um, look, uh, the core purpose of Orang Tamari is to ensure
that our young people are safe and supported and thrived.
Um, it's a tough task,
but, you know, when I step back, my kind
of observations in the last year, um, sort of 14 months
as acting is what I think is that every day, um,
we've got thousands of children that
with our intervention are going to school.
Um, they are being cared for, um, uh, they're going
to sports, they're doing things that they probably would,
wouldn't otherwise do.
Um, there's no question that we can do better
and that we need to do better,
but I think it's really important not to lose sight of
what our, you know, social workers are doing every day on
the front line with the most vulnerable
and challenging children and families.
Um, we have made progress, but we have faced challenges,
and we want to be committed
to being very transparent about those challenges.
And that's what I think today is partly all about.
Um, this year, um, we, when we surveyed our children,
not all of them, but we surveyed a cohort of our children,
96% of them, uh, surveyed, told us that they feel safe
where they live, and 98% said they have someone
who loves them unconditionally.
So I think, you know, that's, that's, um, a,
a really good kind of stat.
The numbers are powerful reminders
of the difference our work makes,
and the responsibility also that we carry.
Uh, we also note that some results in
what we've been doing have declined, uh,
and we have proactively identified those issues
and are actively working to seek to address them.
Um, look with the minister, you, you kind of discussed the,
um, the demanding year that we've had, um,
108,000 reports of concern made
for 63,000 distinct children as a 44% increase.
Um, uh, of that 44,000 roughly reports
of concern required for further action, um,
as at the 30th of June 25,
we've got 4,009 distinct children, uh,
in our statutory care.
So a lot of them are actually
with families that we are supporting.
Um, and then in community homes, um,
and then in the yj area in our secure residences.
So I kind of, I think the volume is really important, um,
because it's a broader kind of issue, societal issue.
Um, uh, in response, our partner,
our people and partners continue to respond,
delivering thousands of investigations
and family group conferences
and support for the children and care.
So, um, uh, you know,
last year I think we had somewhere in the region instead
of 4,000 family group conferences.
So it gives you an example of a volume.
I think one of the things I do want to want to emphasize
is the rise in the complexity of cases.
And this is important for Tamari,
but you know, it's, it's, it's,
I think it's across the system whether you look at education
or health or corrections.
So we are dealing with an increasing, um, issue
of severe behavior issues, uh, neurodevelopment issues,
mental health needs, addictions,
and increasingly children coming from really,
really complex families.
So, I'm not saying that as an excuse, I'm just saying that,
that, that it is a, it is a, it is a,
it is a much more complex environment
that we are dealing with now.
Um, and that requires, you know, uh, much more complex ways,
um, of, of, of working with people.
So there's an extraordinary effort under pressure,
and I want to acknowledge our people, their dedication,
resilience, and professionalism.
Mm-hmm. I also want to kind of acknowledge the people
that we work alongside of caregivers, iwi Maori organization
and community providers.
Um, in particular the caregivers who are a backbone
of the work that we do.
We couldn't do it without ordinary members
of the community putting their hands up to looking
after children in need.
Um, the best outcomes are when we work together
with the community, um,
and we need to do more to work closely with the community,
because ultimately the answer lies in a much more integrated
at anga Tamari community approach.
Um, look, in September last year, we, we kind
of reset the leadership team in terms of focus,
and we had three big areas.
And that's when you kind of look at managing the
organization, delivering on our core purpose,
enabling our people, and getting the basics right.
Um, because there's a huge amount that ARI has to do,
but we can't do everything.
So it's a matter of kind of locking in a, um, a,
a set of focus areas.
And in that, at a, at a really detailed level,
what we do every month is we go through all
of our critical stats,
and that relates to things like social worker visits, um,
um, all about me plans, all of those key stats right through
to what are we doing about our culture, then right through
to have, we got the basics right, hr, management,
finance, et cetera.
We've established during the year a new child protection
investigation unit to strengthen how we respond to harm.
We are, as an indicator upgrading our frontline technology.
We are resuming operations at tga, um, care
and protection residents in Christchurch.
Um, and we're also implementing the findings
of the Dame Kara review.
Um, we've done a huge amount of work on STH youth,
which has seen a decrease from 2023, particularly
among Ranga Maori,
where we have seen a 25, 20 1% drop in serious
persistent offending.
Um, we rolled out the, um, MSA, um, program, um,
which supported a small group
of serious persistent offenders,
and we introduced for that therapeutic care,
strong mentoringship and whanau engagement.
Um, caregiver satisfaction
with support from their social worker is improving.
We need to do more. But, um,
almost all placements have a current caregiver support plan
helping them to meet their needs.
And the minister kind of, um, uh, talked about, uh,
in the investment that we've made there,
and looking ahead, we know there's still a lot more work
to do to improve consistency, coordination,
and timeliness in the system.
Our focus is now embedding long-term sustainable change
through quality practice, investing in our people
and systems, and empowering, um, our partners
to lead responses.
We will keep building trust through transparency,
accountability, and delivery on our core purpose.
Um, look, I want to, uh, thank the leadership team here
behind me for the tireless efforts to pursue the
ARI and who
and to all of our people, um, on the frontline
who do the most difficult and challenging mahi,
but also the most rewarding.
Um, I want to conclude by assuring the committee
that we remain focused on our core purpose, that children
and young people, that children
and young people are safe, feel, love and connection,
and are supported to thrive.
And finally, um, I want to thank everyone,
including you in the select committee
who take a sincere interest in this most important endeavor
to make the difference in the lives
of our most vulnerable children.
So thank you very much. And
questions, uh, thank you, Andrew.
Um, I've come Moreau.
Thank you. Um, Mr.
Chair, um, if I think back
to last year's annual review, there was quite a lot
of interrogation about the contracting.
Yep. Um, can you give us a bit of an update about how that's
progressed over the last year
and what improvements, if any, has been made? Sure.
I'll hand over to, um, uh, Alicia Smith, who's been, um,
leading this work, but we, we've got a lot of work to do,
but we have done a huge amount of work,
and I wanna thank Isha for that.
And we feel we're in a much better space in terms of the,
kind of the analytics of what we need for contracting
for better outcomes for children,
but also in those relationships
and over to Benicia to talk about the last year.
Thanks. So, um,
when I started in March, um, there was a recognition
as I went through a discovery period of trust
and confidence providers in Ari being low as a result
of decisions that had been made the previous year,
and that we needed to, uh, reengage
and, uh, we needed to make sure
that we had a really clear commissioning, uh, approach,
so, uh, that we had engaged with, with providers.
So over the last year, uh, we have undertaken,
uh, two regional engagement series of Hui.
Uh, so the first series, uh, of 24 24 Hui,
uh, went from May until, uh, early August,
the second series we are currently in
the middle of right now.
So we've done 16 Hui of 20, um,
and then the next four are actually, um, today and tomorrow
and, uh, next week.
Um, and so at this Hui, we, uh, for the first series,
we acknowledged the deficiencies of the past
and apologized for that, both myself
and at times when Andrew was able to attend,
we talked about, um, what a proposed commissioning
and investment plan would look like
and an approach to commissioning.
And we workshopped those issues, uh, took feedback, uh, went
to cabinet and in October
who looked at the feedback
and said, uh, am comfortable with, uh,
the modifications we made.
We are now engaging on, uh, that commissioning approach
and we are starting to utilize it.
That commissioning approach starts with a step one, which is
around regional needs assessment.
So we are designing a process with providers about what
that looks like, um, and trying to trial it.
And, uh, with series of data for each of the regions, uh,
each of the regions, uh, in the Hui, um, uh, workshopping
that data pack, uh,
and trying to assess what data is missing in order for us
to be able to take it
to the next step of making the assessment.
Um, and we're asking their feedback on
what are the considerations that we need
to take into account other than just needs.
So, um, I can attest to, um,
the relationship having improved.
It's like any relationships.
Um, it's very easy to walk up nine, well, it's not actually,
uh, walk up nine steps of, uh, um, nine flights of steps.
Uh, when you harm a relationship,
it's like being in an elevator.
You go down very quickly. I feel like we are walking up the
steps, um, and we are kind of at about level four,
but we've still got some way to go.
Um, but we are getting positive engagement, uh,
throughout the more too, um, through for our commissioning
and investment kind of reset.
Very good. Um, can I, so, um, so just
as a sub to that, um, are you saying that this,
when you say regional, is that geographic regional?
So these are gonna be tailored made
for the different areas across the country?
Yes. So we, um, we're doing it according
to the eight regions that, um,
supports itself around.
Mm-hmm. Um, but you know, a really key piece of feedback
that's come is that we need to make sure,
'cause our regions are quite large, so one of them is like,
you know, um, from, um,
under Len down across, across to the west coast, right down
to the Chatham, uh, that's ginormous.
I mean, sorry, Stuart Island. That's like ginormous.
And so we're trying to make sure
that within regions we are looking at sub-regional, um, data
and then bringing it up into a regional approach.
Okay. I come from the East coast, I get the scale
of geography.
Thank you. Yeah. Like I'm
south slightly smaller.
Um, next question, new question, new question. Yep.
Awesome. Thank you.
Um, so you would've heard in the exchange with the minister,
I was asking questions around the military style academies,
um, over, you know,
the last year you've run the military style Academy pilot.
Um, and we've also seen the progressing
of the young serious offender legislation, um,
through the house.
Um, what I wanted to start with is
in terms of that pilot, um, what changes
to the legislation, uh, are likely
to result from that pilot?
Okay. What I'd like to do is just introduce Janet Mays,
who's been working on the MSA, um, project over the last,
um, uh, you know, eight months. Um,
Thanks. Get
you to leave on there. Yes. Thanks.
Uh, call Janet May, uh, you're
Referring to the new legislation?
Yes, yes. So the new legislation, as you're aware, will have
a sentencing option of a military style academy order, uh,
for those who meet a requisite level of serious
and persistent, uh, offending in community.
Sorry, and the question that I had was, in terms
of the pilot, are there any lessons
that were learned from the pilot
and changes that are proposed for the legislation?
Uh, no, not per se.
Uh, changes and lessons learned from the pilot program will
be applied to future iterations
of the MSA in the actual program context,
Uh, but not in terms of legislation.
Correct. Okay.
Um, do you know where that legislation is at
and when it is likely to, oops.
I'm aware we've gone through the first reading, um,
and the process is continuing as best I understand,
But you don't have a timeframe, not
Terms of that. Not at this moment.
Is this the legal team? Yes, Thanks, chief, chief
Short, uh, who runs our policy team policy. Thank you.
Um, so, uh, the lead legislations
before the house, it's on the order paper
and, uh, waits its next reading
and referral to committee of the whole house.
Uh, but you don't have any timings on that?
Um, it's the leader of the house. Yeah. Thank you.
So the reason I'm asking this question is
because I want to understand, uh, the planning
that is taking place for the next iteration
of the Military Style Academy.
Um, the minister in her answers said, no definite
decisions have been made in terms of that.
Could you please talk me through
what planning is happening? Mm,
I'll pick that one up.
So this is a complex piece of work.
Uh, it requires us
to take the lessons learned from the evaluation, uh,
feedback from our Kai Mahi and develop future programming.
Um, because we don't have a set date
for the actual legislation to pass the house,
the planning must be undertaken internally.
So we're not ready
to provide military style Academy programs, uh,
once the legislation passes the house.
Can you, uh, help me understand, though,
because my understanding with the new sentencing option is
that it would take some time once the legislation has passed
before anybody is in fact eligible to be able to,
um, be sentenced to a military style academy.
So why would there be so much planning for the next
military style academy if the law hasn't passed?
And that period of time is, I think, more than a year?
So yeah, I'm just,
So as the minister mentioned, we are undertaking planning
and I guess sat reiki level.
We are giving some thought to perhaps another program
in advance of the legislation next year if that timing were
to sort of fall into place.
Um, this is a therapeutic intervention program.
We have some very, very strong lessons learned.
We've seen improved results for those ran Tahi
who participated in that program.
So it is important for us, if possible,
to be putting another program into place
as soon as practical.
So the planning is complex. It does take time.
It's not an overnight activity.
So that is what is underway at the moment. So just
Supplementary. Can I have another
Supplementary after hearing One?
Thank you. It, um, thank you.
Um, so the minister used the word training,
so people are being trained so you can, so there's,
there's a future in mind, obviously,
otherwise that would be a bit,
and then you've just used words developing future,
and so, so they're coming, um,
even though the minister wasn't able to commit to
that in answer.
Um, so I assume that's true firstly, so that that's,
so in your discussion,
you are telling us the same thing, essentially.
Um, and
therefore, my question then is, is this the only way
that we would've gotten there?
Because is military bootcamp, all
of those ideas that that come up, is this the only idea
that that's, that's worth pursuing, um, in your mind,
given you are leading this piece work?
Right. And I'm asking that particularly from a very
wau centric poppa Maori pedagogy.
Yes. Not, not just a Maori pretty Maori word,
but everything that's in that idea.
Is this the way, is this the best response in town? Yeah.
Well, this is one tool in, in the suite of tools.
Um, we take the elements from the
military, uh, for this program that are
able to help develop these young people.
Camaraderie, teamwork, structure, uh,
this physical activity, confidence courses.
Um, I don't think there's things necessarily
that we want to shy away from.
We celebrate our military.
We are not taking other elements from the military.
Uh, this program is a therapeutic intervention program
supplemented by those military activities,
by vocational activities, educational activities.
One of the key things we learned from the pilot program
was our need to interact
and work with more holistically the whanau.
So for future programs, and when we talk about the planning,
and this is the complexity of planning,
we wanna run a concurrent whanau program, uh,
where we're offering support to whanau,
because ultimately when the young person completes the in
residence program and returns to community,
in our perfect world, we would like the young person
to return to whanau.
Okay. So in our perfect world, yes,
it starts with the wau.
Absolutely. Then everything else becomes ancillary. Yeah.
What you have just described is it starts outside
of a whole other different, Not, not
that it's completely unrelatable, um,
because we're smart enough
and colonized enough to relate to it in a perverse way,
but what you've just described is we start in this worldview
and then we tack on the Maori world.
And that, that that's the, that's the number of it for many,
many, many, um, like me and many of our other hapu
and our iwi and our farmers.
Like, it sounds so reasonable,
but it is just another tool in terms
of taking us away from fundamentally who we are.
And that's the challenge.
And I get, I guess, the nicety of it.
I even get the intention, but it's paved with all
of those things that unmake us.
Yeah. I, I think, um, look that,
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Sorry. That is one program in kind of a massive suite
of initiatives.
So one area that we're doing a lot of work on,
and uh, Darren can speak to is around enabling communities.
Um, and so that is working with Iwi strategic partners, um,
and doing the prototypes.
And the whole point about that is, um, to get the,
the intervention of iwi
before, uh, the child gets into Ang care
and then work within that community, um, in a way
that's gonna work for the whanau and the, and the iwi.
And, you know, that, you know, I think that's,
and we all agree that's a really,
really important initiative
because you want to avoid the child getting into an
Do. We do,
We've got a few supplementaries coming.
I'm gonna take opportunity to ask myself.
Um, uh, what understanding is there that, uh,
the New Zealand army itself is a recognized iwi,
and everyone who becomes a member of
that is a member of that iwi.
And that is, that is recognized by, is recognized
by the Maori king queen, by the surrounding iwi,
by the New Zealand government.
And so that is a important part of, I say that
because I I have been army reservist myself.
Yes. So I understand this.
It has the same, how, how much
of an understanding do you think there is of that,
and how, how much does that feed into programs that
Yeah. So look, uh,
as you are aware, during the pilot program,
we worked with the New Zealand Defense Force.
They guided us on certain elements of the program.
Uh, you'll appreciate that some of the elements
of the military are not familiar to us in Orang.
Uh, so they worked with us.
We spend time working with the young people around history,
uh, understanding the Maori battalion, uh, going to,
for instance, to the Army Museum.
So I think there is, um, a good understanding of that.
Um, for future iterations.
Um, the NZDF involvement will lessen, uh,
as we work through and,
and we have a clearer understanding around now, a lot
of those elements that constitute military style activity.
The, the other, um, point is, um,
you talked about this being a
therapeutic intervention program.
Um, can you step us through a little bit through what
that means in practice? Yeah.
So within the Military style Academy program,
we operated a multidisciplinary team
of kamar, he on the floor.
And that included social workers,
psychologists, case leaders.
Um, a lot of time was spent in group therapeutic sessions,
and then there was one-on-one activity.
In addition to that, there is a high focus on
health and wellbeing.
So that's general health
and wellbeing alongside mental health and wellbeing.
So that was probably one the strongest part
of the program in terms of us working with young people
who have a history of serious and persistent offending.
And we are looking really
to interrupt the re-offending pathway.
And that work has started on that.
Now we acknowledge we need to be stronger in that area,
and certainly the transition into community needs to, uh,
follow those young people, you know, the golden threads.
We need our therapeutic teams, our clinical teams
to follow those young people on that journey.
Um, so they're not having to relive their history,
repeat their story to the next group of people.
So we've recognized that, we've learned from that
and the clinical staff working on the program in the future,
we'll follow those young people into community.
Thank you. Minister talked about how important it was
that there was this work being done
with the siblings of these children.
Yes. Yes. And for me, this is the crux of the issue.
We have children in situ
and the labor program wrapped around those children
in their whanau.
This sounds like when the, the one
of the lessons being learned is we
can't afford not to do that.
That's a major part. Absolutely. Of whatever happens. Yes.
What I wanna know is, in the programs that you're creating,
how much of the, uh, funding is now going to
that work children in their whanau in their community?
Because in a way that seems to be the, the,
the total worry is we're taking these children out,
they're isolated, they're going back,
they're re-offending versus pouring the money into the hanau
and making those connections.
Is that part of your work now? Is that part of the budget?
What's really going on in terms of that work?
Will it become part of the legislation
that there's this work being done in the hanau?
So you'll recall in the pilot program, each of the ranta,
he had a, and that worked for some of the young people.
It did not work as well for others.
Uh, to pick up on the members' comments earlier about we,
you know, wanting wau to be at the center of the activity.
Um, we want to introduce wau
or navigators to work alongside the Wau
and the siblings who are at home, um, to support them.
Whilst the ran tahi is in the residential
phase of the program.
So I can't give you an exact percentage of spend.
But I can assure you that
what we are looking at is a more tailored response.
You know, it's fair to say in the pilot we
went down a particular journey.
We've learned the things that worked well, the things
that didn't work as well, and we want to improve that.
Sorry. Yeah. So just to pursue this, like,
we know this about things like, um, uh,
alcohol programs, et cetera,
that it's all very well when you take somebody out
of addiction, but when we put them back into their families,
everything collapses.
Mm-hmm. Do you agree that that is
where the wisdom is pouring the money into
the support of people, of,
of troubled kids in their own community?
'cause they're inter connected with a whole lot
of other kids and a whole, that's where the,
the effort needs to go.
So I think we'd agree. It's a holistic response.
These ran tahi have committed offenses
and crimes in the community,
And unfortunately, some of these siblings
Yes, true. But
you know, unfortunately, they do need
to go often into the youth justice system.
Yeah. While they're in that system,
through this particular program,
we are working intensively with them.
Concurrent to that is working with the whanau and siblings
because you'll appreciate a lot
of younger children will look up to older siblings as sort
of, you know, oh, that's the journey to go on.
And in the pilot program,
although we didn't do it as strongly as we need to, uh,
win some wrong at attack, he did reoffend, uh,
the mentors within then redeployed
to work alongside the siblings to support them.
You went back to the ana. Absolutely. Yeah.
Uh, thank you for being here and explaining these things.
Uh, you can probably tell there's, um, some people here
who aren't fans of the boot camps, um, as they go against,
you know, the Royal
Commission and different things like that.
Um, and it's not that we, we believe that these tamari
deserve the investment.
We are just very skeptical about the success
and, um, the congratulating
that's going on here today about the success 'cause.
So what I want to ask is, are there any
services that are already provided in the community like
Katie Murray up north, like social services like ra,
who had a million dollars cut overnight without explanation
and had their CE powers to place Tamari removed.
Uh, have you done analysis on any of those, um,
whether they have a higher success rate than the bootcamps?
Um, so of Nicolet
maybe to answer some of that.
But can I just start this conversation by saying, um,
the term bootcamp is extremely emotive as you'll appreciate.
It is steeped in history
and that history is not a good history.
The program we are offering,
these young people could not be further removed
from those things
that we read about in the Royal Commission
into Abuse and Care.
And to be candid, I, for one, would not work on a program
that was abusing young people.
So I just kind of wanted to say that as a get go.
Yeah, I, and can I just, um, I mean there, there,
there are a whole lot of different interventions, um, uh,
with, you know, um, the children, um,
that we've got in care depending on
where they are in the care process.
So there's a lot of sort of community programs that, um,
be's looking at funding, et cetera.
But the, um, you know, I don't know if we can sort
of look at the whole mortgage board
and compare, um, what pro, you know, various programs
that are actually won't be like for like, um, so
what we are, you know, the,
the thing about this intervention is, um,
when we look at the, you know, these are, these are
incredibly challenged children tamrin.
Um, the, the key thing is what we are wanting is outcomes
where they won't solve it overnight,
but will the offending reduce over time
and will the severity reduce?
And that's really the aim of the intervention.
And what we have seen is that has been occurring.
Um, so that's, you know, from a, from a sort
of a bureaucratic, if I can call it that, you know,
public service approach, that's what we're trying
to do in terms of those interventions.
It's, it's not an either or. It's an end, end end.
And so we are seeing the greatest reduction in serious
offending actually with Maori communities.
And it's the kind of work that you are talking about,
it's the partnership work that that is being invested in.
So it's about having a continuum of things that speak to
and address the underlying causes of offending,
which our wellbeing, um, we wellbeing causes alongside that.
And the legislation is really clear about that.
That has to be balanced with appropriate accountability
with taking into account public interest.
So we are trying to have a right-sized set
of interventions from the earliest intervention
and fast track, uh, which our, our,
our community partners are part of, as well
as our government partners.
Um, some of the enabling communities work.
Some of our, uh, work that we see,
great work happening in our, with our iwi and Maori
and community providers, right through
to different circuit breaker approaches, which is
what the MSA is seeking to be at the hiring end.
And what the, um, evaluation is very clearly showed is the
elements that we need to hard bake,
not just into a future iteration of MSA,
but to all of our programs
and residences that are about, um,
reducing for young people.
And we have to try some things and we are learning as we go,
but absolutely the work
that our iwi Maori communities are doing, um, as fundamental
to the complete offer.
Um, Mr. Chair, if I can just add, I mean,
what we're starting to see is some quite, uh, continuous
and extended declines in serious
and persistent youth offending.
Uh, we started with a baseline of around about 1100,
and we are now down to,
I think we would've reported on being very close to target
by the end of the financial year.
We're now down to 892.
So we have, uh, exceeded the, uh, reduction
that the government had set us, uh, several years in advance
that that's coming as a result
of some really good work happening regionally
and locally, where teams, uh,
of a multidisciplinary nature working across
agencies are working collaboratively to design
and create the right responses for some of the young people
who, uh, have, um, persistent, uh,
offending patterns, uh, coming to the attention of police
and not an attending school at the regularity we would like
to see, um, uh, have coming from challenging homes
and that mix, that suite that we have,
of which the military style academies is one
of the interventions, uh, is proving
to be successful in terms of the numbers
that we're seeing reduced.
Uh, so we would expect now to be pushing against
where we see unwanted regional variation.
So there are some particular districts
where the numbers are higher than we would like them to be.
We've seen quite dramatic declines in Northland, uh,
which has been excellent.
We have seen quite dramatic declines for Maori
and Pacific, uh, youth offending,
which has also been excellent.
That is the result of good work on the ground.
Uh, we want to be able to wrap that more tightly together
and work closely with our colleagues at the Ministry
of Education along with police now
to put more pressure in terms
of increasing regular attendance at school
and utilizing some of the, um, vehicles
that we have in play.
So the, the Monetary Style Academy is one of the, uh,
interventions that we have been using, uh,
but certainly the intensive case management approach in the
three location and the work of the, um, uh,
the fast track, fast track in, uh,
as most locations has proven to be quite successful.
Mm, thank you. I'm
One Responding.
Uh, thank you so much.
Um, and for, you know, we wanna see these in place, um,
and community organizations being, being funded.
I do just, I know that there is a real, um, push
to not call these boot camps
and you only have to look at the government's campaigning
that boot camps was used over and over again.
So it's just like a semantics at this point,
because actually you have gone against the Royal Commission
of Inquiry recommendations to bring in third party, um,
contractors to be able to use force.
So they're not actually like,
completely, completely different.
And I just wanted to state that.
Yes, I know you don't want to call them boot camps
and yes, there's some good things happening here.
So, but when you're not comparing, like are you concerned
that you're not actually looking at these, uh, in situ
organizations like who I talked about
and seeing their results compared to these
military style Academy boot camps and,
and the investment that they're getting compared
to their results, compared to their investment
that you're putting into boot camps
and the results that you're getting there?
Well, what I suppose what I'm saying is I just don't think
it's mutually, I don't think it's mutually exclusive.
Um, I mean, we've got a, we've got a program, um,
we are running the program and there are various other
programs that we are either running or supporting.
And, um, uh, sure over time, you know,
you'll get a much better sense of, um, you know, like
for like, and not like for like, um, uh, but you know, in,
but at the moment we are, you know, this is one as, um,
Nicolette and Jeff, um, have said,
and one of a number of initiatives that we are, um,
we are investing in, in supporting.
And I think we would absolutely agree that we have
to continuously evaluate whether we've got the right, um,
level of provision
and evaluation right across the continuum of responses.
That's where the focus is
because actually, um, that's, I guess the critical point is
one, one intervention in of itself in isolation from the end
to end responses life course starting young,
actually starting while kids are in primary school.
Mm-hmm. If we are not dealing with a full spectrum,
we're only treating symptoms of the very serious end
of the youth offending now rather than getting
ahead of, of what's to come.
So we are genuinely committed to looking right across
that continuum of life, of investment, of whanau life.
Um, and it is important that we do contextualize
that the work in the military style academy program is
working for some young people,
but it is only one part of a continuum of responses.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, I hope you can remember right back to
where my questions were earlier, um,
where I was talking about the, um, progressing
of the legislation and the planning for the next iterations
of the military style Academy.
I just want to be really clear, is it possible
that we will have another military style academy being run
before the legislation has been passed
and the sentencing in that has come into effect?
Happy to answer that. It's possible
that we will run another program in a residence within our
existing legislation, legislative settings
that test elements of a program that continue to repair us
for the range of, um,
young serious offending legislation coming in,
which is not just the military style academy,
it's extended residential, um, orders as extended, um,
supervision and supervision effectivity orders
in the, um, community.
So it is possible we will run another program
and as, as, um, Janet said, we need to be prepared,
and it does take time to make sure
that you have the best program in place.
You can't just have, um, programs up and ready to go.
You have to do the preparation.
This is more than just, um, testing the, the single order
and the proposed legislation.
It's testing our entire approach, um, to different, um,
some of the different orders ahead of us as well,
including improving the way programs
are delivered in our residency.
So, so you use the word testing, I mean,
I would use the word experimenting.
So we are about to potentially have another voluntary,
it'd have to be voluntary, wouldn't it?
Um, because that's how it would be done under your existing
legislation, uh, cohort to, uh, undertake this
military style academy.
Appreciate. People don't like the language, um, bootcamp.
I'm wondering why it's even called a military style academy
when we've heard a description of those, um,
military style activities in it.
Um, experiment.
What the question was, again, before the legislation, I,
I mean, I think we would disagree with, disagree
with the word experiment that's,
that's exploring whether there are,
there are further things we needed,
but we had a pilot, the purpose of the pilot was
to inform the legislation.
We have legislation that hasn't progressed
through the house, and even if it does progress in the very
near future under the sentencing in that there's not going
to be a cohort that is eligible
to undertake military style academy program.
So I, I mean, I just find this really problematic.
Made a question while Again, that's fine.
Um, my questions, I think I've got clarification on that.
So my question then does go to
what others have been pointing out, like, how can we justify
that this is the best use of $30 million of funding
that has been allocated in the budget
for military style academies?
It kind of begs the question,
if this option is being created, what
actually exists in youth justice facilities outside
of the military style Academy program mm-hmm.
Why is there nothing else that, that money
could be better spent on for all youth justice, not those
who just volunteer to be part of it,
or who in the future will be sentenced to it?
Uh, I mean, my colleagues will probably be able
to answer more specifically what's happening in residences.
But what I can say is, again, um,
we are not just using the findings of the evaluation
to inform, um, the next iteration of legislative programs.
We are actually using it to inform
what works in our residences.
So there actually has been an investment,
and actually when we go back to the review that was done,
um, which Mike Bush supported, um,
they talked about the absence of programs, um,
in, in our residences.
And actually we have seen an investment in program roles,
um, in, in the kind of, um, activities
and therapeutic options, um, within residences.
We have underway at the moment, a full review of
how healthcare is provided across all of our residences.
So it wouldn't be accurate, I don't believe to say
that we are only focused on this.
Um, this program is the only group
of young people in a residence who are benefiting from
evidence-based approaches.
But we have to build those, they haven't been in place,
and we are, we have to build them.
I have a, um, supplementary actually on this as well.
Um, can you just remind the committee the category
of offenses that young people will have committed
that they become eligible for, uh, a military style category
and where else they may have gone if it's not
into military cell academy? Yeah,
Yeah. Um,
so for the pilot program, the RAN
who were eligible for that program had participated in eight
or more family group conferences.
They had been in youth justice residences, uh,
at least eight times prior to that.
The type of offending we are talking about is
at the serious end.
So we're talking about aggravated robbery, ram raids,
home invasions use of a weapon, them,
And I've, I've, um, you know, I, I've worked in
courts around New Zealand.
I've worked in youth courts around New Zealand.
I've seen young people coming back at time, time and time
and time again, uh, with offending.
And I know some
of my colleagues don't think we should try new things
to try, you know, inter create intervention
and actually support you don't into their
offending for my colleagues.
They're actually continuing our thing by way.
So You're welcome. That's fine. Yeah.
Um, so a new thing, uh, what, what I'm,
what I'm interested in is this, um, you know,
obviously there the structure, which, you know,
you talked a little bit about, uh,
and the therapeutic intervention, which I think is critical,
and then the work with the family
as a supportive structure around it.
So, uh, how much confidence do you have in, in the program
of work that you've been doing on this that you are, um,
seeing some changes in young people who come back time
and time and time and time again?
So, if we look at our ranta
who participated in the pilot program, uh,
as you're all aware, one young person tragically was killed
in November last year.
That left us with nine Ranu Tahi on the program.
Of those nine young people on the program,
two have never re-offended since being on the program.
Now, when we consider that these young people were
probably on a trajectory towards an adult setting, uh,
we consider that a tremendous result.
Oh, well, well,
Sorry. Uh,
some others did re-offend.
Uh, they spend some time in residence
and have come back out into the community
and have not re-offended.
We have one young man who unprompted has written letters
of apology to his victims.
Uh, this is not a pill.
This is not a perfect science
where we just take these ranu tahi off the streets
for a period of three months and then into community
and expect to change overnight, uh,
a long lifetime, often of trauma,
high and complex needs, and then offending.
Uh, it is intended to interrupt,
re-offending or offending.
And for some of these ran tahi,
we were successful in doing that.
And if I could just add, um, again,
just thinking about the
continuum of things that we are doing.
So the group that you are talking about,
and I was a youth justice social worker,
so I know these young people incredibly well myself,
and was, um, one of those people who was challenged
with finding those solutions
when everything else did not worked.
Um, so the intensive case management approach
that we've introduced, which is again, delivered
of partnership with multi agencies, with community partners,
is about saying these young people
require social work responses, which are much more targeted.
And, um, we have more time to engage with young people.
We have more ability to draw those, um, plans together
that support, um, offending behavior.
So again, it's not putting all of our eggs in one basket.
It is about working too to reduce, um, those young people
who come back through the system getting to a stage
where they need those kind
of interventions such as that we've just talked about.
But when they do need them, they also need to be there.
So it's about having the continuum
and we working, you know,
this is more work than we've ever done to build
that continuum of responses.
I'll, I'll, I'll make the comment that, uh,
having worked in the sector for a decade, uh,
across the country, uh, to, to see a reduction in offending,
let alone no offending, is quite a phenomenal outcome.
Uh, but, uh, supplementary momentum
Up really quick one.
So just, uh, so we talk about, and among trajectory
and continuum is the reoffenders
that our young people.
What is, is there any analysis done on
their, their, um, if the trajectory began with them?
Or did it begin in their,
with their parents or their grandparents?
So did they have a previous history?
Oh, because we, I certainly saw
that in the family harm space,
We absolutely know that the young people
that not all there, there are certainly young people who,
um, the majority I would say would come outta nowhere,
but you might not be able to see predictive risk factors.
But the vast majority, yes, they have, um, um, experienced,
um, family violence and other harms in home.
They have been, um, unable to be successfully supported to,
um, stay in school beyond primary school, sometimes,
let alone intermediate high school.
Um, so yeah, absolutely.
So we are trying to also address a decade worth of harm
by that time for these kids.
And that's why, um, as we talk about, um,
and while it might not be prescribed in legislation now,
absolute intention is to take every opportunity to say,
actually, if I've got a 15-year-old who's got troubles,
I'm really gonna think about that 5-year-old brother who in
what we do to keep them in school.
And so that is what drives our people.
And absolutely, you're right.
Um, that's why you can't have one intervention option.
And that's why some of our community
approaches our approaches with Iwi, our approaches that do
see the value and benefit of Whakapapa connected support,
uh, also front and center of, of our entire social work
and professional practice strategy,
not just our individual programs
Might.
Yeah. Thank you. Um,
how many are in corrections facilities
of the, from the pilot program?
Yeah. Two, two, thank you.
Um, so just picking up on that, um, conversation
that we've been having, because I am still, um, concerned
that we have $30 million of funding tagged specifically
for the military style Academy.
Yet we are hearing about, um, the need for programs
in the wider youth justice, um, facilities.
And I'm just trying to flick to my notes
because I mean, that's earmarked for
military style academies,
whether they've been super successful or not.
Um, I also note that the organization posted a surplus.
What intensive wraparound funding is there
for the therapeutic, um, supports
for young people in the wider youth justice facility?
Um, not just in those that
volunteer into a military style academy, uh,
or, uh, sentenced in the future to a military style academy?
Uh, I mean, I think one thing I'd I would say is
it's a multi-year investment.
So just to be clear about that and, and the investment
and why, so, um, I'm not talking also included, um, some
of those therapeutic and other elements for non MSA orders.
Um, I don't probably have the,
I thought there were two separate lots of funding.
There's 30 million for the continuation of Fast Track.
They've asked what other funding there is.
So I'm just being clear. And it's not just fast Track,
it's also the other, um, the extended supervision activity.
It's other, um, you know, yeah.
So you have that for everybody else.
And then you have this for 10 people.
I mean, like, what are the numbers that are, um, going
to be eligible?
What data do you have about the numbers
that are gonna be eligible to be sentenced
to a military style academy?
I'm just really trying to figure out the cost benefit
analysis of this military style academy
where we are hearing the need
for programs right across the board in the continuum.
I can't see
and hear the case, um, clearly for this level
of investment in this one particular program. Oh, I, you
Have asked us multiple times, will Jen think as a,
as a policy decision that that's been made
to put money into this, their, their job is,
is to execute on that policy?
Well, I'll move on in terms of that one.
So then my question, uh, for example is
how many psychologists are there working in the Youth
Justice facilities?
I'll pick probably one of the ones that's been most public
with, um, publicity, UR Meki,
how many psychologists work in Ur Meki?
Um,
We, we don't have that number, but we can give back to
Yep. And how
many social workers are on the floor each day
in our Youth justice facilities?
So, um, in terms of our current state, um, not as many
as I would like would be the answer to that.
So we have soc some, um, a number
of our case leader roles
would be followed by social workers.
Um, but the investment that has been made, uh,
through B 25 in terms of professionalization is all about
that, is about saying we wanna lift the, um, core learning
for all of our care workers and residences,
and we want to increase the proportion of professional, um,
staff in each of our residences.
So my answer to your question,
while we dunno the exact number, is that we need to grow
that, and that's
what the investment is request the, um, but we,
We, we, we will come with Thank you.
So what it currently is and what this new investment, um,
we can expect because, and then I,
Sorry. Our team is psychologists
of 57, uh,
FTEs working right across our, um,
service, but we'll be able to
Come back to you. That's across the
continuum from peer protection 3D.
Yeah, IM, I'm asking specifically for you justice, because
We are, I'm, I've other meetings 20 quite some time,
so I'm gonna move that group.
I think actually it's a nice segue. Yeah.
Uh, because my question, um, does relate
to those frontline workers and, um,
and I joined the, you know, the chorus of, um, you know,
thankfulness to them for the work
that they do on the frontline.
But, um, can you just run through anything
that you may be doing
to help encourage people into social work
profess profession?
Uh, because I think it's been echoed a few
times today mm-hmm.
That, um, you know, we are desperately short
and we would love to bring those numbers up.
So is there any sort of active recruitment going on?
So you're talking about social workers across
our, the organizations?
Yes. Yep. Um, so I'm pleased to say that the number
of vacancies that we've had, uh,
pre in previous years is reducing, is still,
we've still got about a hundred net vacancies
across the social work field.
But I think when we were before the committee last year from
memory, um, it was about 50 or 60 more than that.
And that's still a lot of capacity that we need to find.
Um, but what we do know, um, is our approach
to better supporting students, um, our approach to the, uh,
new induction program we built along, um,
and a couple of years ago.
Um, and that our approach to changing our practice, um,
we are actually seeing people turning to Ang Tamari
who have, who have worked for us
before, which is a great thing.
'cause that's an experience workforce that comes back.
I'm not talking about floods, but certainly, um, a number.
And, um, we are also working, um, incredibly hard to
recognize the different groups of social workers we can, um,
focus our recruitment efforts on.
And so thinking particularly about what does that first year
of practice looks look like,
and so MSD have a, a sector role, um, as,
as do the social work registration board
and the whole of social work workforce.
Um, but we think there's more that we could do about
that first year of practice and how we can support that, um,
and keep, keep social workers in.
So, um, we're also, um,
thinking particularly about rural sites.
So we know that our rural sites are often the ones
that have high vacancies.
Um, and there's something quite special.
Like I've just been down and doing
visits actually in Southland.
Um, there's something quite unique about, um,
a rural social worker who has to be very multi-skilled.
Um, and so we actually wanna highlight, um, the actual, um,
value of that kind of mahi as part of attracting, um,
into those places in particular.
So we're seeing gains, um, we've got more to do
and we can't do it as only as an agency.
It has to be part of a whole sector approach. Yeah.
So, um, so just to be clear, there's no incentives,
you know, to maybe helping with student loans or study
or, you know, anything work as you earn or,
Um, we, we, we are exploring those options as part
of the MSD sector space.
So what is that? There's a lot, a lot
of conversation in the social work field as a whole about
how you might support that first year of practice,
including, um, work to earn.
What we have done in, and we've seen real success with,
is our allied support worker role.
So we have a number of social workers now who started, um,
often during these studies being employed by us
as an allied support worker role,
doing those really important tasks alongside social workers,
like supporting organization of, um, all the aspects
of a child's plan, all of that kind of good work.
Um, and, and have deliberately halfway into a social work
role and are now employed by us as social workers.
So that's absolutely part of
how the gap is closing in our
recruitment, but we've got more to do. Definitely.
I've gotta supplement Sure on that.
Um, because the, if I, if I read the figures correctly,
in 20 24, 25,
you received ang Tamari received 108,032 reports concerned
for 63,103 children compared to 74,941 reports concerned
for 53,638 children in the year prior.
So if I calculate that correctly,
that's about 45% increase reports of concern.
Yes. That, uh, would inevitably mean that you're going
to need that workforce to be able to, you know, assess that,
which is a, you know, and having talked
to people in the field is it's a lot of work underway.
Mm-hmm. Uh, sort of under underlines, I think just
how important Ang Tam's role is.
Mm-hmm. Um, because that is the frontline
and when things go wrong and, and people see an issue.
Um, so, um, just in terms of ensuring you, you, you do have
that workforce coming through
and also that they see it as a good pathway for them being,
where, where do you see your work in shaping that, I guess
that perception narrative as much as you have the ability
to influence that, um, to help build this workforce
that needs to come through to do this really important work?
So, one thing I'd say is our strategy has tended to be
to try and tell our stories publicly
and hope people pick them up
and tell other people about the good work our people do.
That doesn't work very well, to be honest.
Um, so our strategy has changed this year that we are now,
um, routinely publishing the stories
of our practitioners on our own websites,
on our own social media platforms.
And actually there are amazing examples
of our fabulous people who are doing fantastic work.
And actually, they, they are becoming the ambassadors
to others, I think of, um, of what's possible to do,
even though we have an incredibly pressured workforce,
we can't, we are not gonna shy away from the fact
that there are increasing in reports of concern,
has absolutely tested our capacity to respond,
but our people are still responding.
And actually, an example of that would be that despite
that increase, we've actually seen, um, the numbers
of unallocated cases actually come down from
where they were in April, 2024,
if I've got my year right from about 1700.
So they're sitting at about 1300 now, even though, um,
there's huge demand.
So it's the stories that we are much better at promoting,
um, about, um, our people through our websites,
through our social media, and they are getting good pickup.
And I think they're starting to tell the story.
It's also really important that our own people hear
good stories about, um, the work we do,
because actually, um, sometimes the narrative
that's told about them isn't a particularly fair
and balanced one, if I'm honest.
Look, I think, um, they're probably,
there's probably a three-pronged approach to this.
I mean, the first is all of the work neglect
and team are doing about ensuring
that social work is an attractive, um,
uh, uh, profession.
Uh, and that working for, which is really the hard end, um,
is an attractive proposition in a worthwhile proposition.
And in one sense, you know, well, in many senses it is
because you are, you know,
you're making a fundamental intervention
into the lives of children.
Uh, the second one, the second part is just
that whole allied workforce.
So, you know, we say we face the same issue as the,
the health profession does.
You know, the question you have to ask yourself is,
does the social worker need
to do everything they're currently doing?
Uh, or if you bought in a trained allied workforce,
could they do things so a social worker doesn't have
to transport every child,
but at the moment, a lot
of transport is done by social workers.
So you bring in an allied workforce
and you fo you focus the social worker on, on, on the,
on the face-to-face the really the conversations, the,
you know, mentoring all of those, the diagnostic.
And the third thing is gonna be really
important is technology.
Um, and so we're doing some testing around technology,
you know, with reports of concern, um,
and taking out some of the kind of the admin
and then the development of the TSU program as well.
And I think when you kind of look at volume, I think
that technology is gonna be really, really important, um,
because it will help us to kind of triage
and, um, you know, you've gotta test it as a go
and it won't be perfect, but human
intervention isn't perfect either.
So I think if you look, look at those three pillars, that's
how we are looking at the, at, at the work, at
managing the volume, going, going forward.
And what we've actually built this year is a,
that can tell us quite specifically, um, uh,
when we are able to recognize a saving
of time from one thing, whether it's technology
or other roles, what social work capacity
that creates back in the system.
And to be able to really be really clear actually,
and we've never done this before, to be able
to say it quite a nuance level for a child
and care, how much social work capacity do we actually have
to make available to make all of the care standards
to make all of the, um, best practice expectations.
And so we are getting very, very, um,
specific in using tools
and information much, um, more effectively
to help us get really clear about the capacity we have in
the capacity we need, and how the improvements
that Andrew's talked about will help create capacity
alongside recruitment and retention.
Just on, on that, the, um, what, what is it,
is it new technology that you're using
or a new use of the existing technology?
So because it's taking, um, and, and as it would along
and robust process to get
to our future case management system mm-hmm.
We wanted to do some things concurrently.
So it is a mixture of
what can we optimize in our existing case management at, um,
low, um, regretful spend in terms of things
that will be future-proofed alongside, um,
being really clear that actually the, the, um, big gains are
to be made when we do have the fit
for purpose case management platform in the future.
So how, how many technology
or how many systems would a case manager have
to touch in a given day?
Oh, um, In terms of typing information,
checking, cross referencing,
Et cetera. Yeah, they're mainly using
a case management system,
but there are other things, um, that are needed, um,
at times around, um, financial management of things.
Uh, probably the bigger shifting between things is
that a lot of, as you can appreciate work
with our professionals is via email.
So the swiveling between, um, working in, in an email space
and into the case management space sounds silly,
but that's a time consuming task.
And actually, so, um, there's technologies in the platforms
that we're exploring that allow you to do, um, that kind
of communication in the system.
Um, and that then becoming part of the case case record.
So those are the kind of things that we are
embracing, um, moving forward.
Um, it's more that, uh,
within our massive case management system, there are
so many different places you have
to sometimes repeat the same information.
So it might not be the way they're moving between platforms,
but they are having to work through repetitive, um,
placement of information in different places.
And, and it's that kind of thing.
It's things like, um,
every agency has a different referral form, so filling in,
um, referrals
for multiple services can take a social worker all day.
Um, the ability to automate
and select information
that already exists in the case management system,
pre-populated forms, this is all our future.
This is what we wanna make sure our social workers have so
that they are spending the best time possible
with, with children and families.
So we'll do as much of that as we can, um,
with an existing resource and existing platforms.
But, um, the big bucks are when we get
to the new platform next year.
So as we We're doing, for example,
on digitizing report concern process, uh, we'll save time
and enable people to be able to work on, uh,
other things in the national contact center.
Our core response rates are comparable
with Australian jurisdictions, uh,
but it is about how we can, uh,
better understand particularly email reports of concern
and better, uh, get the information from those
that can be quite time consuming.
So we want to be able to utilize these digital tools, uh,
to unlock, uh, more time for people to be able
to exercise on practice.
I should ask, while, while we're on here
for I hand over questions, others, is, um,
just on those reports of concern, what any, any sort of, um,
idea of what, what is driving
that 45% increase over the last year? Reports of concern?
Uh, um, I mean,
I think the minister did cover some of the things that we know.
So we definitely did change, um, some practices.
So it's not that we ignored concerns previously,
but there were things that should have been recorded
as a report of concern, um, that, uh,
were sometimes recorded in a different way in our system.
We wanna make sure that we have clear visibility,
so they would be reports of concern
that didn't necessarily require further action,
but should be recorded well.
So that has accounted for, for, for,
you know, we think about a quarter.
Um, but is that right?
Increased, but actually more of it is, um,
increased awareness, increased, um, response.
But also we've talked about it all morning.
There is genuinely higher need in our communities
and we are, um, like every agency working as hard as we can
to stay, uh, to respond to that
Internationally. There's
a strong relationship between, uh, for example, cost
of living as we would think about it, uh, currently
and increases in reports of concern.
Uh, we have seen significant increases in
methamphetamine consumption.
We have seen, uh, some, uh, small increases,
but noticeable increases in terms of, uh, various forms
of harm in the community.
So not, uh, surprisingly
we are seeing an increased some report to concern.
Uh, in addition to that, in that particular year, uh,
we stood up the, um, pilot work through in Tani,
uh, receiving reports of concern that saw greater awareness
and greater use of, uh, that facility.
And we also, um,
undertook some mess allegation investigation.
So all of these things had contributed to the sharp on mass
Allegation.
And, uh, last one of our, you know, just on this one, do,
do you have a breakdown of how much
that increase were critical urgent?
Hmm. It couldn't see it in the report.
I don't think we've got that data point.
Um, I don't have it direct hand,
but we have seen proportional increases across all,
um, urgency types.
And it might just help to clarify,
we have three types of urgency.
So we have a critical case that needs to be responded
to within 24 hours, very urgent, which is 48 hours
in 10 days, which is still considered urgent,
but it requires a 10 day response.
And I think, I dunno, Alison, whether you've got more
of a sense of that, but I think they've seen probably a bit
of growth across all of them.
I think analysis that, Yeah,
If you, if you did have that,
See if we can find it in, in the, in the brain.
Thank you. Um, just to might not be a direct, but,
but what, which is why I wanna ask it.
So, uh, reports are concern
and then uplifts just as there a,
so, and, and then to the uplift.
So, and what is a reverse uplift?
Can you help me to understand what that was? Mm-hmm.
Um, and, and why I, so we did it.
So my little arrow goes up and down, what's concern uplifts
and, and Jeff, you talked about, um, just being the,
uh, the connect to the cost of living, um, issues
for families, or you just mentioned
that just being meth use,
is alcohol still the biggest issue that,
I mean, meth is a,
and it's talked about so often, it's kind
of got its own like that.
I would still report that
alcohol is still the biggest issue.
Um, what do you find
Are you finding, um, when we look at,
so I'll answer that question first.
When we look at, we do analysis
of the reasons children into care.
Yeah. Um, when we look at them, uh, we would see
that the top three reasons are, um,
family violence and aggression.
And I mean it, the chronic and severe end of family violence
and aggression, um, uh, drug use,
which includes the full spectrum of,
of substance use and serious neglect.
Um, what would, what we find about the children
who do come into care is that they tend to not to have, um,
or their families tend
to not have only one of those factors.
So most have, um, a correlation
of at least three of those factors.
Yeah. Um,
and sadly we do still see that there is a correlation
between, um, uh, parents
who might have had extensive involvement with, um,
in the past including, um,
having had previous children removed
or, um, so that, that's the picture.
Um, it's really, really clear when we look at
our case file analysis.
These are, um, significant serious safety issues.
Um, still though, what I would say is that the majority
of children who are coming into statutory care, um,
in the early phase, um, we still see very,
very good evidence of working with whanau, working
with other professionals, um, looking at alternatives
to come into care, um,
and where children do come into care wherever
possible, keeping them with whanau.
Um, in terms of the trend, um, of, of care, um,
people will know there's sort of a curve that kind
of goes down after 2019.
And we had the very strong focus following the Haws Bay
review and the Wang Tribunal review of our practice
around, uh, Peppe.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so we saw a very strong reduction at that time.
That actual trend has actually, um, probably plateaued now,
and there's probably tipping up slightly as we see some
of the, um, uh, increased complexity.
Um, but that's across all of the age groups.
So, um, we're certainly not seeing a pendulum swing back
to high ranks of here.
And in our section 78 reporting in our annual report.
Uh, you might have observed that about eight, just over 80%
of the cases that came through section 78 were, uh,
had a mix of those three complexity issues
that Nicolette talked about.
So we, we are seeing, uh, a greater degree of complexity,
uh, and the profile of people that, that engage with us
or that require a services.
And, and to be clear that the,
I I'm certainly not crediting, um, our ability to, uh,
retain comparatively stable rates of enter to care just to,
our efforts is absolutely partnership efforts.
So we see strong collaboration.
I think this is the area, um,
where actually we're seeing the most change over time,
and it's an area where our partners are, um,
and incredibly important part of, um,
how wraparound support is unlocked to vulnerable families.
And that's one of the exciting components of some
of the work we're doing at the moment is, uh, some
of our partners have that fuller array,
that fuller spread spectrum of services available by done
to the way that they're organized themselves.
So that creates opportunities for us, uh, to respond
to complexity with integrated responses,
and they come in, build case management, uh,
and whanau centered in many instances.
And that, uh, creates a real opportunity. Great.
A $30 million opportunity, do you think?
Well, um, you to do is
A half a billion dollar opportunity.
Like we still continue
to invest more than 500 million in community,
um, care and support right.
Across the continuum support
And to ka Maori, um,
Does there a, I think we, we, we monitor that.
Is there ation? I think it's,
And there's real opportunity in our decentralization right
outside of our funded, um, sector
that's currently available.
Uh, we add $1.1 billion in our services,
how we can unlock opportunities for decentralization
through, uh, delegation of functions.
Yeah. Uh, yeah.
And the ability to pick up some of the functions
that we hold Yeah.
Is where the opportunity truly exists.
Um, we'd like to see, uh,
greater growth in our section 3 1 6 right.
Provision. Yeah. Um, where we have national providers
that are undertaking some of our services.
Mm. They're doing a really good job
because they're focused just on that service.
Yeah. It's this complexity that we're often faced with. Mm.
Those opportunities to, uh, share some
of the functionality we have, have them picked up
by community as we have seen in some
of the enabling communities prototypes
is quite exciting. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. I mean, I think, um, you know, we, we've sort of,
I mean, we've talked about this before here as well.
Well, is that, you know, the ultimate kind of destination is
to look at what you can, um,
devolve through to the community.
Mm-hmm. And we've, you know, you've,
you've got your commission and contracting,
you've got the enabling communities.
Yeah. Um, but you kind of look at the baseline
and then you think actually, you know, ultimately these,
these issues originate in the community
and it's the community that will have the skillset
and the wherewithal and the knowledge to deal with, with,
with these issues rightly supported.
Yeah. So even if you look at things like, you know, a pony
or secure residences, you know, there's no reason
that they couldn't come a day where they are run
by the community Right.
And supported. And then ultimately
that might be done quite differently.
Um, but that's, you know, I think that's the, that's the,
you know, that's sort of the, the, you know,
the broad philosophy is that we've gotta look, um,
for these opportunities, um,
because the community know the children.
And that's the key thing. I think
When we surveyed our community
and Maori organizations this year,
and we reported an annual report, close to 80%
of them are signaling to us the ready to take on more.
Um, we, we think that's the right thing,
that's the right trajectory for us to pursue
how we do it over what timeframe
and the extent to which some of the very tricky, uh,
statutory responsibilities held by the chief executive, uh,
shared requires ongoing work.
Uh, we're doing some work on, uh, sections 15, section 17,
uh, being able to, uh,
delegate the functions associated with that.
Um, that provides a model for how we might do
that in other parts of legislation.
I just, sorry, I just want gonna wind up now just that,
um, and,
and, uh, recognizing what you're just saying too, Jeff,
which is, so in the far north,
particularly when we talk about we have statutory care
of our fish and our trees, but not our una.
So how do we do that? So this is what you've just said,
that's a, that's a prime opportunity to open that up.
And the, and the, and the workforce
that's going on in its very regular Maori Hapu way,
workforce development
that's just ticking along in places small
and big to, um, to, to be the statutory,
if statutory is required.
It might not, but could I think of reality? It will be.
And, and I think, um, there, well, no,
I was gonna say in a perverse way, but in a necessary way.
We are there. I think those communities are actually there,
and I think this is prime opportunity to go there.
So that's what I was meaning about an extra $30 million in
the prevention space is, um,
something I was kind of alluding to. And,
And I, um, probably urged the member
to think a little more beyond, uh, that that funding
and think more broadly about, uh, you know,
for 1.6 billion we invest in, in care, uh, at,
at an organizational level, whether that is in community
or in the services we deliver.
Yeah. There are opportunities.
There's some very good practice taking place, uh,
up in the far north.
Yeah. Yeah. Um, and there's some very good leadership, uh,
in place there that are driving that
and are very experienced.
Yeah. So there, there's opportunities to grow more
through our strategic partnering arrangements.
Mm-hmm. And we look forward to the promise of that. Cool.
And, and just so we do have a particular measure
around investment in Iwi Maori community, um,
and that's continues to be, it's, it exceeds the standard.
We would probably still wanna see it grow.
Um, but I think that also speaks to the work
that Benita shared with the minister around.
If you take that regional and local approach
and evidence based approach about what is the,
not just the need, but the cap, uh, uh, capacity
that exists in each community,
that obviously is gonna be a case
where we have those strong iwi Maori led, um,
initiatives coming through. Thanks.
New question, Helen. Thank you.
Um, before I go to my new question, you did talk about, um,
Australian response rates,
and if you've got that information, I'd love to just add it
to the collection of things we'd like to see. Um,
Yes. It's in the Australian
Productivity Commission for 2324.
Yeah. Have that afterwards. What I wanna move on
to is contract manage.
Um, yesterday we had the Yeah, sorry,
I knew it was gonna be you.
Um, so yesterday we had the social investment agency in,
and there were questions around the impact on other
agencies, because while it's a small budget, it actually,
we are hearing from other agencies
that it's holding up the way they contract.
So there are contracting with community groups
for very short periods, often six months while they wait for
a lead from the social investment agency
and the impact it's having.
We've heard a scathing report about OT earlier this year
and it's contract management,
and we've heard promises that there will be a lot of work
with the agency.
But one of the things that we are seeing in the review,
we've just got the report we've got from you is not a lot
of detail about what's going on in that space about working
with the social agency.
I've just heard you talk about localism. I get it.
I think it's wonderful. But we know we've had 1.5 million
cut from Presbyterian support for its counseling services,
the North Shore Family Centers winding up.
Can I please know a lot more than I do at the end of this
question about what's going on
with the social investment agency
and those, those contracting arrangements
with community groups?
Cool. Big question, but you are up to it.
You're really good.
Thanks. Um, so in relation
to the social enlistment agency, there is a piece of work
that's underway, uh, in conjunction with them.
Um, it was signed off by cabinet in on the 13th of October.
It relates to, um, um,
a reviewing a review of all of our services to ensure
that they're well commissioned and well understood.
Uh, we are currently prioritizing in phase one of
that review, a review of five large programs relating
to family starts, strengthening families, gateway,
post gateway, social workers in schools,
and one large, uh, provider to understand their reach
and their impact in relation to reach.
We want to understand what the cohorts are
that they're reaching, uh, in relation to impact.
We wanna understand efficacy
or effectiveness of those services.
Uh, that review is due by, um, the end of March
to be reported back to cabinet.
We have been working very solidly with those 140 providers,
um, uh, involving, um, Hui with them, uh,
outlining the data that we are looking to utilize
for the review this week.
They have been commenting on, um, that data
and providing further data for us to analyze.
Uh, further meetings will be held with them between now, um,
and, uh, the end of March.
And we have to report to cabinet on, you know,
what we are finding and where it goes to the key, uh,
component of that review that the social investment agency
and order naiki are running relates to, um,
which agency will be the agency that, um,
those providers will have ongoing conversations
with post March.
Because, because it all have been determined
where the reaches, is it all Oniki priority cohorts
or as a broader reach and
therefore has broader outcomes that are being met
and might be best suited for transfer
to the social investment agency or another.
That's the work that's underway.
That's phase one of a, a review
of all services that need to be undertaken. Can you
Tell me about the six month contract?
We don't have any six month contracts right now.
We have extended, uh, those from that, uh, that were,
uh, coming to an end on the 31st of December.
They have been extended until the 31st of March,
2027,
February, March.
So 4 20, 27 20. So, so not next year. 14 months.
Pardon? 14 months or 15 months. 15 months.
It's a bit longer than six months. Supplementary more.
Um, just a very quick one.
Um, in terms of that, um, the potential changes
to the contracting system, have you got any thoughts,
initial thoughts about how that might look?
Yeah, I mean, one of the things is that, um, we tend
to contract with providers in a way that has, um,
a number of contracts.
So we might, one provider might
have multiple contracts with us.
So we are looking to, for example, consolidate.
So we've actually done a little bit
of consolidation just recently.
We need to do this more broadly, um, so
that we have one agreement, uh, which has one set
of outcomes, one set of lead performance indicators
that would be be being met with a series
of schedules relating to the services.
So that would decrease the bureaucracy
and reporting that a provider would need to undertake.
So that's just one example of one of the things
that we are looking to change within that we want to change
with and work with the provider to change how we
measure performance.
Uh, right now it's quite output driven. Yes.
So we wanna be much more outcome driven.
Um, and so we're just trying to work through that process
and that's gonna take us a bit of time to work through that
because we've got 470 providers to work with.
Mm-hmm. I, I understand too that some
of those providers were actually doing that anyway,
but cross pollinization
with those various contracts they had.
Yes. So, um, thank you.
You've touched on this a little bit
and I think in your answer, the what question I've got about
is, is what improvements have has along Tam made since the
audit general's report to us?
Contracting, um, you know, process. Yeah.
Consolidation's obviously part of
it, what you just touched on. Is there anything else?
Yeah, I mean, so there's a number of things
that we've got underway as opposed to we've completed them,
it's a four year program of work.
So if I go back to the, uh, the three reviews
that were undertaken of ordering's, uh, procurement
and, uh, commissioning approach, there were four kind
of broad recommendations.
They related to our strategic procurement
and planning process, our ev uh,
making evidence-based decision making, uh,
looking at our contract management
and relationship integrity
and looking at our internal governance.
So we have improved internal governance with material
being considered at appropriate times
by the executive leadership team.
We are looking at our contract management
and relationship management processes
through significantly upping our game
around communications and engagement.
Good example of that is we now have a regular nui.
Since I've been on board,
we've sent out 10 since March 10 pani.
And we've had, uh, 35 in-person meetings, um,
of which I've attended, I think 30 of them.
Um, and lead from the front, uh,
from the contract management perspective, as I said,
it's a long term process for us to change the, um, and,
and move to contract consolidate.
Um, and we wanna, uh, journey that with providers.
So that's, we're literally we working with each provider,
um, as things come up.
So that's, that's just gonna take a bit of time, um,
around contract management.
Our issue around, uh, strategic procurement
and planning is, um,
I currently invest in 1,797 services.
I cannot procure for all of them at the same time.
Um, and therefore, um, we are looking
to develop a broad procurement plan,
which is currently under development
in the current regional Hui.
I have been talking to providers
and saying, at our next regional Hui, next year,
the first series likely to be commencing in about April.
We will be coming out with a draft procurement plan
that categorizes the services
and outlines by year what we might be prioritizing
and to seek their feedback on it.
Does it work? Um,
'cause we're gonna have to do it by probably some by region,
some nationally, and it's like a, a tapestry,
which I'm gonna have to program and, and work it out.
So I think I need to test that with providers, you know,
more broadly first, before I actually solidify that also
with that procurement process, I'm gonna have to go
through quite a significant service design process prior
to procuring, because the current service specifications
and the current services we are contracting
for are out of date.
Uh, many services we, uh, procured for back in 2017.
Some are actually 2007. Services have changed since then.
Needs have changed. And there's emerging technology.
There's a whole range of things. Practice has changed.
We need to make sure that our services are designed
to meet those changing needs
and not be, um, like they were, uh, kind of 15 years ago.
So we're gonna have to work out how we do
that service design process.
So again, this is a four year, at least a four year process
to kind of work through all of the services
that we currently invest in and,
and work out how we do that.
So major planning is underway to, um, yeah.
And we'll be open
and transparent about that with, uh, providers directly.
Um, and in terms of our evidence-based decision making
process, um, we are starting
with our five step commissioning approach,
which we are now implementing, starting off
with a regional needs assessment.
So that's what we're currently testing in our regional hui,
going around with some draft data packs for each
of the regions testing.
Have we got the right, have we identified the right needs?
Um, have we identified the right data
to identify those needs?
And lots of feedback has been coming in, you know,
through the workshops to date.
So we've got some room to continue to innovate around what
that will look like in the end.
I've got, uh, uh, just a question that you,
earlier you said about, you know, focusing on outputs and,
or sorry, focusing outcomes rather than outputs
in the last couple of years on this committee, I've,
I've heard that a lot across different agencies, um,
including there's a general, you know,
agreement that's what needs to be done.
Um, the, the difficulties and the detail. Yeah.
I think and, and, uh, you know, dealing with, you know,
very complex human beings with a complex variety
of, you know, factors.
Um, and then, you know what, it can take time for change
and it does take time for change.
Absolutely. And for that to be evidenced.
So I'm interested in just what your process is to try
and identify the outcome sort of framework
that then you can then, you know, um, uh,
determine whether you're you're achieving success over,
over in the future or, or not.
Yeah, I, this will absolutely be a, a bit of a journey
that we go through, but we're gonna start with,
which is the orang tamari outcomes framework
that we currently have in place that was designed, uh, with
and by DHI in care.
Um, and so there's a range of outcomes that we've got.
I just don't have them in front of me.
Our annual, oh, they're annual report. Thank you.
Um, there's about five or six of them,
and then we'll start from there with each provider.
And then we'll start to innovate
depending on the service that they deliver.
We have been really clear that most
of those outcomes are gonna be achieved in 20 years.
Number of our services are gonna be for three or four years.
So how can you demonstrate something that's a, a 20 year,
you know, um, kind of process.
So we have to work through
and help develop, um, with the provider, the, um,
the lead kind of indicators that demonstrate that, um, uh,
they're on track that makes sense.
As opposed to Yes, they've met this outcome.
If that makes sense. Yeah.
It's a journey we haven't, yeah, we,
I think we have currently, you know, developed, um,
four contracts like this
and we are just, we are piloting, trying
to work out have we got it right.
We've indicated that we are gonna review
regularly with the provider.
They, yeah, they've been very happy with
what we've done date and just kind of regular conversations.
Have we got it right? Yeah,
Just, just, oh, sorry. No, I was
Just gonna add the, getting the methodologies
for data collection
and for impact measurement is quite important
and we're, um, advancing well in that area.
The legacy work we're doing at the moment is quite a helpful
forerunner of how we may be able to methodologically,
I mean, there's an element of rocket science in trying
to draw relationships between activities and outcomes.
Mm-hmm. And we're improving in that area,
but we still have quite a way to go.
We want to step back from sort
of willy-nilly output occurring in different locations
that are hard to show, hard for our providers to show
and demonstrate the, the impact we know
that impacts occurring.
'cause we can see it more at a population and cohort level.
We just need to tie those things better together. Yeah.
And then, um, as we, we've got underway.
Yeah. And while, while we're on that topic, um, you know,
we, we've been hearing from the social investment agency
about the work they're doing with the
integrated data infrastructure.
Yeah. Um, I'm just interested in how, how that relationship.
Absolutely. This is, sorry, if we just add one more
thing component to it, also, how
that's gonna work is you devolve more services further out
to make sure that you've got a good data flow going.
Yeah. Between, between, uh, say, you know, iwi run group,
so they've got the data they need and, and vice versa.
You've got the data you need.
Yeah. So the joint review underway, um, one
of the key reasons we wanted to work very closely
with the social investment agency is
because of their methodologies
and stills, uh, tools that they've developed.
Um, and the relationship with the IDI.
So part of the review of looking at impact is doing
what Jeff said and utilizing the IDI
with the social investment agency.
Literally, if I could have them here right now, I would,
you know, have Afra Green, you know, their DCE, um,
of system, you know Yeah.
Performance and insights here.
Her and I've been doing joint meetings together
with providers, you know, over the last, um, kind
of two months, um, in relation to working with, um,
um, our strategic we partners.
Um, Darren's been doing some great work with identifying,
you know, what are the outcomes, you know, to, we are trying
to achieve, uh, with them on the pieces of work.
Um, if I think about, um, uh,
commissioning approach, you know, that's happening.
One of the things that, uh, we are looking, um, to take, um,
on board is how are they commissioning, how,
'cause we are gonna, basically, we are looking to, for them
to be the commissioning agency rather than us, uh,
within their region.
Well, small region at this stage.
And, um, the key thing that we are looking to agree
with them is the outcomes that we are seeking to achieve
for the TAM
and tahi that they will be, um, commissioning for.
We have more than 200 data sharing
arrangements in place now.
Um, so we have quite a lot of, uh, arrangements, uh,
that we had mechanisms for, uh, some of the data
that we hold is legacy data.
Some of it we, uh, it was transferred
to us when we were set up
and then progressively we put in place a new data warehouse
and, uh, got the foundations, uh, in place
to a greater degree around the standards of data
that we need to comply with.
So we're doing work now on data modernization.
We're doing work on, uh, to prepare for, uh,
the Fitsu tool as it comes into play.
Um, you know, we, we are an agency that holds both a mix of,
uh, written information as well as data
that we store in Cyrus.
So it's quite a complicated, um, array at the moment.
We wanna simplify that as we, uh, move into, uh, fitsu.
But we also wanna make sure the data
that we're putting in there is really high quality
because it's so important to us being able
to get the right mix of responses, uh, to people.
And I think one of the challenges
and outcomes comes approach too, is how you start
to measure those early signs of shift.
Because actually, um, outcomes don't magically get to
that high end of, um, presence of good health.
They might start with reduction of, um, poor things, right?
And how do you measure, how do you have enough nuance and,
and in our measures to understand those early outcomes so
that you can continue to invest
and you don't cut things off too early
to incubate the things that have that early, um, evidence
of heading in the right direction.
And that's a real challenge, I
think is a challenge for all of us.
And I think just adding to that, I think with providers
and partners, how of found new contracting arrangements
we'll be considering, uh, data arrangements
and how data might be shared.
So we are already starting
to talk in our regional engagement, who we, you know, what
that might look like.
Um, we understand that, you know,
data infrastructure is required.
We have over 150 providers of our four 70
that have a contract with us for less than 150,000.
So we know that, um, uh,
they will not have the infrastructure.
So we are talking to them about collaboration, clustering,
you know, 'cause there are some arrangement in region,
you know, that is happening around, uh, data management.
So yeah, we're looking for instances where we can support,
uh, those types of arrangements too. Uh, lost the,
Thank you. One
of the, um, concerns that came up, um,
in those reports at that, um, time where there was criticism
was that the, um, kinds of, of behaviors
towards the people who were being contracted with at
that time were overbearing.
There was a lot of pressure on them to agree.
Um, it sounds fantastic
that you've been having those meetings, particularly
with a social investment agency with providers provider.
Can you tell me what steps are being put in place
to make sure that that doesn't happen again?
Um, well, I just think, um, it's about, uh,
giving effect to our code of conduct
and acting with respect. So there's
Already a code.
Yeah. There already is a code.
And, um, I have been really clear with, you know, um,
my team and, um, about working with providers
and partners in a respectful way.
That doesn't mean that we can't have differences of views,
um, but you can still work
through those in a respectful manner.
And I've also indicated, um, um,
and outlined, what are some of the acce unacceptable things
that should not be occurring?
Yeah. So those types of behaviors,
but also things that really, um, frustrate partners
or providers is us not paying on time,
which escalates behaviors.
So I'm like, well, we just need to be really clear.
This is the timeframe.
We need these things prior,
and we should make sure when their invoice
and their report is in time that they're paid on time.
Like, what's the issue, folks?
And if there's, uh, if there is an issue, then you need
to be escalating, you know, to myself, you know,
very quickly so we can resolve it. So, so
Just stronger Leadership, so just stronger, yeah.
Leadership and, and exhibiting, um, um,
um, being more helpful around
what are the challenges that we are coping with
and being more helpful around, Hey,
this is why it hasn't been paid,
because these things, this is what we, you know,
we emailed you on this date.
We had a phone call with you on this date.
This is why you haven't been paid.
These are the two things we need.
This is what your contract says.
Question. Um, sorry.
Just, just I think it's really important that, you know, we,
we, you know, when we got the OIG report,
we didn't push back against it, you know,
we absorbed the recommendations.
Um, and, you know, uh, we did a reset.
Part of that reset was Benicia coming on board, um,
and reorganizing the team.
And one of the key things was how do we
reset the relationship, uh, with the providers.
So what we are kind of, you know, I suppose one
of the critical messages, the providers are critical
to the work that we do into looking
after the, uh, uh, children.
We can, we cannot operate without the providers.
And as we go forward, over the coming years, those providers
and the iwi groups
and the strategic partners are gonna become
more and more important.
Um, and I think, you know, it's, as Benicia said,
it was also the little things not responding
to communications, responding in ways
that weren't actually helpful, didn't provide information,
not giving, um, uh, providers a long enough period
to off board, perhaps in certain situations.
Mm-hmm. So it's just about, you know, that, you know,
that sort of classic mantra of, you know, do un others
that you have done unto you.
And, and that I think is the approach we've taken.
And I think there has been a real shift in that relationship
and a realistic shift.
They know the world's gonna be different going forward.
They know there won't be as many providers in, you know,
in the next five years because you can't
sustain so many providers.
Um, and they know they've gotta be very, very agile
because actually the needs of the children
change quite differently in different regions, um,
over spaces of time.
Uh, so it's not kind of one program forever,
because actually the needs of the children change.
So I think, you know, uh, probably really wanna stress
to the, to the committee that, um,
the OAG report was kind of a big hit.
We acknowledge, we acknowledge it,
and we have been very, very emphatic in responding to it.
Um, and we think we are getting there in terms
of rectifying a lot of those issues that they raised.
It's encouraging. Thank you. Um,
Yeah. New, new line. No questioning.
Thanks.
Um, and this will take a little bit to, um,
preface the question, which is important.
The Royal Commission, uh, highlighted issues with orkis,
um, sorry, um, sorry.
The Royal Commission, uh, into abuse
and state care highlighted the misuse of practices like, uh,
the use of secure care.
Um, and it's a significant issue.
And I asked a series of wqs recently, um, about whether
or not the extensions of secure care
beyond the initial time period allowed, um,
actually complied with the law.
Um, it was really concerning
to see in multiple instances across almost all
of the secure residences, that's both youth justice
and care and protection.
Uh, extensions did not,
some extensions did not comply with the law.
The reason given was, um, that
staff were being given refresher training.
But when I looked at the data, despite that, particularly in
and uni, there were more illegal extensions in January
to July, um, this year than there were in the July
to December period last year.
My questions are, why is it that extensions to secure care
are not complying with the law?
Neil? Um, I'm just gonna hand over to Neil Biles,
who's coming to help us, um, manage the YJ uh, residences.
Probably first start off to say
that we are very, very focused on it.
We are really, really concerned about it.
Um, we can't have extensions of secure care
that don't comply with the law.
So that's a, you know, that's the bottom line.
But perhaps if I, um, hand over to Neil to go
through the program that we are looking
At, I mean, just to thank you with that though, I, I mean,
from July, January to July, 2025 in the number
that were extended was 51,
and the number with no prior authorizations was 39.
Yep. That was up from 13 in the previous six month period.
Yep. Yep. Um, in the answer, could you please explain to me,
I mean, you know, why that's happening,
but also, do you have sufficient funding
and plans in place to address this issue?
Yep.
Uh, thank you. The, so you're correct.
There is an issue with some of the extensions.
So in terms of the admissions, um,
we've had a look at the data, the initial admissions fine.
We've got, we've got good, um, assurance
that the admissions are being done lawfully out of the,
the numbers that we've looked at with the numbers
that we've, that you've been provided with.
I was doing a calculation on this yesterday.
Um, the figure that, that I've calculated is 5%
of all secure extensions are currently there.
There's an unlawful aspect to some of those.
Now, there may be reasons for that in terms of some
of the complexities of that.
For example, um, you can put somebody into admissions, uh,
you can admit somebody to secure for three days
after that you've got a, um, get a,
an extension from the court.
But what sometimes happens is if somebody is released on,
say, day two, but then there's another incident later on
that day, and they go back into secure, it calculates
as a three day, it continues.
Whereas some of the staff are not recognizing that, that
that is, that's gonna, you're gonna require an extension.
It doesn't start again, the clock doesn't start again.
Mm-hmm. So there's a training need
here for some of our staff.
We're seeing, and we have seen over the year, quite a lot
of turnover in, in our youth justice residencies,
which is impacting on some of the skillset that we have.
So we're focusing on that, making sure
that within the professionalization work that we are,
we've done and will continue to do, uh,
or the uplift that we've been doing, uh, pot, uh,
potentially at Wai Meki, we are focusing on that.
So I recognize that this has been an issue. It is an issue.
Um, the, uh, Amy who's currently running
Kki is very focused on this as well.
It's not always just one simple answer
that people aren't doing their jobs.
There are some complexities in terms of the legislation
that they work to, and also, as we've referred to earlier,
um, some of the complexities in some
of the young people that they're managing.
Whereas their behavior might shift quite dynamically from
day one to day two to day three.
The, as you know, you've, you've visited the sites,
there's not a lot of options that some of the staff have
with some of the more higher end,
more problematic young people.
But that shouldn't excuse the fact that when we, um,
do have an opportunity to do this properly,
then the expectation is, is that it's done properly
through the law in line with the legislation.
But I do think moving forward, um,
that it is probably an area that we need to look at
to see whether the legislation that we currently have,
is it, is it too restrictive in terms of what the staff have
to work with on any given day?
Do we need to, do we need to look at the,
the manner in which we, we apply for an extension?
Is there, is there a way that we can speed that up
through working with our, our, our, um,
colleagues in the MOJ and courts?
Or are there other ways of doing this
that don't bring us into, into a breach,
but still keep the, the wellbeing of the child
and the safety of the staff at the heart of the issue?
So, supplementary to that, I mean, we've had, uh,
reports from where the
children's commissioner expresses concern about the use of,
um, secure and increasing use of secure
and inappropriate use of secure, uh, when I visited, um,
um, I particularly wanted to talk to the staff
because that was one of the sites
where that had been raised.
I mean, are you confident that we don't have a case here?
Like we've seen in the Royal Commission
where secure care is being used by children
who don't feel safe in the wider facility
or as a terms of punishment?
How can you give us confidence, uh,
that it is being used appropriately?
And I and I, when it's been done currently on a high, uh,
level illegally in, um, many cases,
and I don't, I worry, uh, with the explanation
that you've given that, you know,
is the legislative settings for it, um, appropriate,
and there's not a lot, a lot of other tools available.
Um, this is something that we have been debating
as the legislation has been going through the house
for responding to abuse and care, for example.
So, um, I
mean, just in terms of that, like
how concerned are you by this?
I also heard you say it's only 5% of
No, so I don't,
I don't think I used the word only 5% is still concerning,
but you know, it should, it should be,
it should be lower than that much lower percent.
The, um, the, I think anytime
that we use our most coercive powers, um,
when we are keeping people in any form of custody,
we should be concerned that we are using that appropriately.
And if we see areas where, um,
that is not meeting our required legislation
or not meeting the standard, then there's work to be done.
It will be multifaceted.
There will be various reasons speaking
to the team only this morning.
In terms of some of the issues around our use of secure, um,
anecdotally, I, I'm advised that we do have some young,
some young people in some of the residences
who will prefer to go to secure.
Um, the reasons for that is unlikely.
A prison where segregation is pretty stark, um, insecure,
they get quite a lot of attention from staff.
I've visited the residents
and myself where I've visited Secure, um,
largely they are out with the staff very often, um,
engaged in some activity, um, having discussions
or doing some form of interaction,
which is, which is good to see.
But nevertheless, the reason that they're there could be
that they're having issues
with some of the other residences.
They may be fearful of some of the other residences.
They may have coping issues
or some other psychosomatic issues which want them to be
separate from other people.
In re only recently
I witnessed some exceptional care being given
to a young person, young transgender person
who is having real difficulties creating a lot
of difficulties, um, for themselves,
but also having real difficulties in just managing,
um, their own behavior.
And where they are at the moment, being very,
very well looked after by staff,
both the residential youth workers and health staff as well.
So you'll get a whole complex range of these young people
who again, need some specific care and attention.
And going back to what I said
before, sometimes the staff have the wide range of options,
which you might find in other custodial settings elsewhere,
um, in, in New Zealand.
So I do think, um, if, uh, 'cause I, 'cause I'm not,
but if I was staying, uh, with Orangutan Maki,
there is a discussion that I'd be having with, um, the rest
of my colleagues in TAR about, with the complexities
that we are now seeing coming into Youth Justice, um,
the change over the years in terms of the age group
that we manage, the challenging behavior that we have.
Is our legislation currently fit for purpose in all
of its aspects in all of its areas?
Is it the right thing, um,
to be looking at certain for EC secure?
Should we be looking at whether
or not the legislation is correct?
But sitting alongside that,
whilst we have our current legislation,
we must be doing everything that we can to make sure
that we are in line with that.
And where we are not, where we, where we have breached.
We need to dig into that
and find out the reasons why lessons learned,
not just accept that there's been a breach
and move on, find out why.
So that's my expectation on the residential managers
who manage your youth justice residences.
It's not just report the number and let's move on.
Give me the reasons why we had this breach.
Was it a a process setting? Was it a staff training issue?
Was it a lack of capability?
Was there a delay in getting a response from the courts?
What is the issue here?
So that we can be more informed, more,
more information we have, the better we can.
We're coming, coming close to the end here.
I'll just have to ask everyone's questions
and ask to be a bit more succinct
'cause there are a few more s Sure.
Yep. Uh, well, I suppose you touched on it.
Um, one of the challenges
that you acknowledged was turnover.
Um, and I have in front of me some of the information about
how over the last year,
multiple staff across several youth justice
and secure, um, care
and protection facilities have been stood down,
placed on leave or altered duties while a workplace incident
was being investigated.
It worries me the increase in the use of secure care
and on many occasions illegally and these statistics.
What are you doing to improve staff training
and professionalism in these youth justice facilities?
So, um, yes, we, we have seen a number
of staff stood down, either, um,
stood down whilst an investigation is alone or put on leave.
I think that is the right thing to do.
We will always, we will always put the child safety at the
heart of the matter if we need
to stand staff down whilst we investigate, whilst we,
if we stand staff down, it doesn't necessarily correlate
to a finding of guilt, but we need to deal
with the issue first and foremost.
Um, but part of the work that we will be doing,
and we'll continue to do over,
over the next four years in terms
of professionalization is first of all, um,
improving our induction processes
for when we induct staff into our youth residences.
Uh, focusing on our standard operating practices,
making sure that they are not only fit for purpose
and the right things to be looking at, but they are embedded
and we are seeing evidence
of them happening every single day.
Focus on the leadership of our youth justice residents so
that they've got the good skills, they've got, uh,
appropriate skills both in terms of management
of youth justice residents, but also the HR and ER issues,
and that they're dealing with these things quickly
so we can identify them.
And then, um, building a,
building a pathway for our staff as well.
So it's not just you, you, you come in
and that's where you're gonna be for forever and a day.
They see a pathway. We can, we can, uh,
use accredited training, microcredentials, uh, lift
that capability up continuously.
So that almost continuous cycle of learning and, and,
and capability building.
That's what you'll see.
Thank you. I just want to ask in terms of Q Meki,
because it has been one of the ones
that we've seen reporting on, what number of
reset plan are we up to with Q Meki?
I note that there are a number of staff
who have stood down there
and like you say, right thing
to do while an investigation is pending,
you say it doesn't necessarily correlate to them being, um,
found for that to have been found to be true.
What's happening at meki,
But I, what I can tell you now is we've just come
to the end of a 12th week, um, step in, if you like, with
Amy, who I've referred to earlier as as Stephan,
to manage that for the last 12 weeks.
We've seen some really good improvements.
We are not there yet. And
what I wanna see is these improvements
that we've seen in terms of the uplift in leadership,
the focus on the day-to-day practice, the attention
to standard operating procedures.
I wanna see that in embedded because having a 12 week
and thinking you've done it, I'm gonna get you nowhere.
We'll be back to square one
before you know it, it needs to be embedded,
it needs to be maintained.
So the next phase, moving on from that,
we've completed this first 12 week, analyze what we've done,
what worked really well, speak to the staff,
speak to the young people as well.
What, what worked really well, where's the evidence
that this piece of work led to that piece of improvement
work with Amy and the team in terms of making sure
that the future leadership, the future capability
of Kara monarchy is stable.
That they have the support that they need wrapped
around them from, um, the, the wider, uh,
group of Ranu Tamaki.
We're engaging with our colleagues in social, in,
in the social work area so that we've got other,
other people coming in and helping advise
and support what we do so
that these things aren't happening hidden away.
We're transparent what we do, we work with, uh,
our oversight bodies.
Um, uh, the children's commissioner learn from
their findings as well.
Don't hide from them. Be open to them.
And I think we'll see these, the the improvements
that we've seen over the recent, um, step in plan.
We'll see them build.
My question, question is the minister everything
Last year? Well, Jane,
I I've given you a lot of questions ing
and we might go slightly over time to let you have a chance
to ask one or two.
Thank you. Yeah, that would be great. Thank you.
So despite rising youth, youth homelessness
and clear evidence from voice
that an tahi leaving state care are struggling
to secure stable housing, the number
of supported accommodation places funded by
has dropped from 148
to 134.
And that's a 9.5% reduction.
Well, below that target of 150,
we've just had a report come out called the state
of the Streets from Back Make Change showing that
17% of the kids that they are servicing
who are sleeping rough 15 or under
and 20% are made up of 16 and 17 year olds.
So how can the ministry justify reducing housing support
for clear, experienced young people at the very moment
that they're needing it the most?
I think we'd probably have to go to check that data.
I'm not sure that it's a reduction.
I think it's that we have not met
the appropriation standard.
Darren might be better to speak to
At.
So, um, there's a difference
between the hud the housing accommodation availability.
Uh, last year we actually supported 180 placements,
but of the homes.
And so the, the, we had 150, um, supported
homes available through hud.
And so that ended on the 30th of June.
So we are still supporting accommodation at the moment
for transition into adulthood, but we still need more.
We've also seen increase in other forms
of support in that transition space.
So we've seen a 21% increase in, in terms
of the social transition support that young people
left care are receiving.
And, um, we still have, um, options
and support young people to remain in care, remain
with their caregivers beyond the end of custody.
So it was, was, again, a wraparound set
of interventions in that transition space.
But certainly, I mean, housing is, is a, is a primary need
that we have to have to focus on.
But I just would just point out that there are a range
of supports that sit around that.
And we were ments
And it's one of the things we lifted up.
The system action plan is more dedicated focus in terms
of cross-agency work in this area
around support accommodation, that, that will have, uh,
an important system impact particularly, uh, through HUD
and others, how we work together to get, uh,
young people into the right placements.
Thank you. So I'm, I'm taking this data
specifically from the report here, which says
that under the success matric of the statutory intervention
and transition of success, that that success measure
is the number of supported accommodation places available
to young people will be at least 150.
There was 148 and 23 to 24,
and this has reduced in your report to 134.
So there is a decline of nearly 10%
with these reports showing so many young people
and care experienced young people are sleeping rough.
And that is increasing.
I guess what I wanna know is
what advice is the ministry received on the risks
to those young people, especially those exiting care?
I mean, we take advice on, on everything,
but we also know deeply
and personally who these young people are and,
and in some of, in the risks they're facing.
So we're not waiting, I guess,
to be told about those level of risks.
And it is about, particularly for young people
who are leaving care, um, creating
that village cross agency village
so we can meet some of those needs.
We can't meet all of them, which is,
I think Jeff references the importance of the, um,
collaborative ordering plan.
Um, it is about availability of accommodations, also about,
um, supporting young people with the skills
to retain safe accommodation, to be safe, um,
to pursue their, their talents
and employment and all of those kind of things.
So it has to be a holistic solution
wrapped around that as well.
Absolutely. But, but that can't just be OT delivering there,
I Guess. I think that's
what my colleague was pointing to.
Darren was talking about 180 places being
held, uh, through hut.
So it's sort of, um, while it may be lower in our setting,
uh, that that has been picked up elsewhere.
Mm-hmm. And, and we're still in seeing that increase in,
in young people sleeping rough.
And I guess what we are seeing is
a huge investment into imprisoning children rather
than housing them.
And so I want to see what are the solutions that
is investing in to
Offer housing Other than youth
justice and imprisonment.
Yeah. That's why we've also asked
to have a change in the measures.
So at the moment, part of the measure is
to have available X amount, 150 placements.
We are asking now that for next year,
that the measure will change to
how many are supported into accommodation.
Mm-hmm. Which is actually well above what the target is.
So the target is one 50 to have placements available,
but we've actually supported 180 well above the target.
So that's why you'll probably see a change if we get
that approved to change the measure onto
what the actual supports happening for young people.
But we support you in the sense
that these thank you demands. The very last
Question too, pa, is one question.
I've allowed some others, some
Long questions.
Sorry. Um, thank you.
I I just wanted to, um, go back to the, uh,
the, the budget allocation for, uh, making, uh,
care resides, uh, more secure and safe.
This is a question from our colleague Laura, who is,
has lost her voice, um, also, uh, who's on the video.
I also wanted to just, um, attach to that, um,
a question on, um, if you could provide insights on how,
um, that care, uh, facility,
not just in in orkis care,
but in care providers, um, how,
how they can be made safe really,
and how the budget has been tracking.
So I guess there's two pieces of investment,
which probably mean we best place than
we've ever been to actually.
Um, we've known the, the things we need to solve.
We've actually got some capacity
to solve for some of them now.
So that is the investment in our resident space
that we've talked, touched on professionalization,
but it's also the improvement in facilities and, and,
and the like, um, the, the, the 16 million in terms
of the Royal Commission response, um, just to kind
of summarize, is allowing us to really focus in on
where we need to support care most
and which is our group home care.
Actually, that is one of the areas where we,
where we know we've got more to do.
So, so far we've already been able
to increase things like safety interventions, training
to group home caregivers, which is all about strategies,
better techniques to intervene with complex young people,
um, rather than seeing things escalate.
Um, we've done quite a lot of work this year
around general caregiver support, improving a range
of policies and practices.
Um, but the big opportunities are ahead
of us In the next year, uh, we'll begin
to pilot some things like, um, increased respite care
for caregivers, um,
stronger assurance mechanisms in our group home
and, um, um, settings, uh, different ways
of using contracted care.
Um, and, uh, really trying
to rethink our approach to specialist care.
So at the moment we have individual caregivers
and then we have our group home or residential settings.
We think there's something quite different we could do with,
with that specialist care space,
which we've not been able to do before.
Um, which means that more young people are getting their
complex needs met, but still in a,
in a homelike environment.
So, um, we, we've, we are really clear on the things
that we want to lean into and we've, um,
put the foundations we've spent this year really putting
the foundations in place.
Now we can accelerate into the investment that's ahead.
Well, uh, thank you all very much for coming along,
spending a well couple thousands.
I think it's been very educational for all of us.
Um, and I, I would say, um, I encourage this.
So a lot of work's happens, uh, clearly since last year.
So I wanna thank you and all your team, uh, for the work,
hard work you do, looking after some of the most challenged,
uh, um, uh, young people in our country
who we all want to succeed.
So thank you. Thank you very
Much. Thanks
very much to the select committee.
Um, um, that was a really, really good, um, uh, interaction.
And, um, clearly you've done a huge amount of homework.
Um, there are a lot of detailed questions. Yeah.
Um, a lot of hard questions, um,
but that hopefully, um, we've answered 'em to the best
of our ability and hopefully you've got a bit
of a richer understanding of what we're doing.
So thank you very much. And, um, Merry Christmas,
Mery Christmas,
run over it for a little.